Let's start with the truth. The 3-point shot was created for people who couldn't play basketball. It was made for people who couldn't grow tall enough, dribble well enough, drive hard enough or move fast enough.

It was for the last kid picked on the playground. The one who pushed his glasses up his nose. The one who wore black socks in gym class. The 3-point shot was made for you and me.

Like other well-meaning props — instant replay, artificial turf and social media — it got out of hand, doing more harm than good, or as the French say "faire plus de mai de bien."

I don't know if the French really say that. In fact I know almost nothing of what the French say, but, like the 3-point shot, pretension is worth a little extra.

And what is the pretense here? It is that a shot from 23 feet is worth half again as much as a shot from 22 feet, less if you are in college or a woman.

Basketball below the rim is worth more than basketball above the rim, when all that really matters is that the basketball goes through the rim.

To apply my best abductive logic, a shot from inches away should count less than one from far away. Hence, the layup would be merely a penny cluttering up the tip jar and the 3-pointer the $5 bill, the one the barista puts in to shame you.

A 500-foot home run counts the same as a 300-footer, though admittedly the gasps are louder. An 80-yard touchdown pass counts the same as a 1-yard quarterback sneak. A goal is a goal in hockey, no matter from how far away or how invisible.

Rarity is the decider here, and nothing is less rare than someone on a fast break pulling up to shoot a 3, or whipping the ball around until it gets to the shooter standing in his spot, after he takes a step away from the basket.

The 3-pointer has become as dull as the intentional walk, and any competent player in the NBA can make a 3. There is no special skill to it. Some are better than others just as some are taller than others or more agile than others. They do not get an extra reward for being so. This is nothing against those who do it well. The concern is how easy it has become and how it has altered the game.

A basket should count what a basket counts. If we start assigning greater value to the length of things, Pinocchio never would stop lying.

A stunt has become standard, like bottled water and the ATM, and there is no going back. Yet we must be alert because that's the kind of thinking that leads to curved TVs, driverless cars and Pilates.

What started as a scratch became a rash, grew into a disease and is now an epidemic. Oh, let's just say the name. Stephen Curry.

The current darling of all things hoop, Curry is blissfully throwing up basketballs from 25, 30, 40 feet expecting them to go in, which they do more often than not. By season's end he will have 400 or so of them.

Basketball will survive the Age of Curry, just as it did the Age of Jordan, the Age of Wilt and the Age of Dr. J, except when you put them together like that, the Age of Curry is certainly the least enthralling, no matter the breathless accounts of yet 12 or 15 more 3-pointers in one night.

It is too late to do anything about this, though the NBA had no problem in widening the lane (twice), establishing a shot clock or outlawing zone defenses, each a reaction and an obvious improvement.

The game of flow and feed and finesse that used to be will not return as long as making a third of your shots counts as much as making half of your shots. Metrics are to blame and when has that not been true?

Don't get me started on hockey shootouts, college football overtime or the designated hitter. Especially the designated hitter.

Bernie Lincicome is a special contributor to the Chicago Tribune.