He has shared recipe for shakshuka dish of baked eggs with Femail

Recipes use own-brand items and stretch ingredients to keep costs down

His frugal but healthy meal plans never repeat the same dish for dinner

Six years ago, Limahl Asmall was paying off debts and barely able to pay his sky-high London rent while working for minimum wage.

The 31-year-old, of north-east London, was living below the poverty line, surviving on cheap pasta dishes day-in, day-out.

Sick of his boring meals, he started to only buy own-brand supermarket products and created a few clever recipes that stretch ingredients out across a whole week.

Now, he has used his knowledge to create amazingly frugal meal plans, which feed a family well for just £18 a week per person - or 86p a meal - without repeating a dinner once.

Scroll down for meal plan

Limahl Asmall (pictured) has come up with frugal meal plans that costs a family just £18 a week - or 86p a meal - which he has shared in new free cookbook

Limahl's best marinated vegetables, which is one of the 86p meals in his new cookbook

The recipes are all in his cookbook, Tiny Budget Cooking, which is free to download and has been endorsed by TV chef Jamie Oliver.

Limahl, who has worked full-time on the cookbook for the last year, told Femail Food&Drink he was releasing the book free of charge to help those facing food poverty.

He said: 'There’s 13 million people in the UK that are living below the poverty line. That’s one in five people across the country.

'I’ve never felt like I was facing food poverty, even if on paper I have been. I think with a little know-how, a basic kitchen, and the confidence to get cooking, you’ll never feel like you’re facing food poverty.

'That’s what this cookbook is all about – giving people the skills to make mouth-watering meals on any budget.'

Limahl has a recipe for sweet potato and carrot soup, topped with swirl of creme fraiche

No dinner is repeated twice in Limahl's meal plans, though lunches are often leftovers of what has been planned for the night before, such as Sammy T's dirty rice (pictured)

Limahl suggests having pan-fried Asian-style rice cakes (pictured) for lunch on a Sunday

The cook has worked on the book with his 22-year-old French girlfriend Tiphaine Cheveau, who Limahl said he fell in love with after she made him the 'perfect' chocolate fondant.

She helps him refine the recipes and is translating the book into French in between working full-time in London.

There have been many chefs and authors who have created frugal meal plans and created books - why is this one any different?

Limahl points to his self-described 'revolutionary' ingredient-swapping section at the bottom of every recipe, which allows cooks to swap out any items that don't have or don't like and replace them with something else equally suitable.

'But our real difference lies in each of our one-week meal plans that costs only £18 per person,' says Limahl.

Limahl, 31, (left) lives with his French girlfriend Tiphaine Cheveau (right), 22, who helped him refine his recipes for the cookbook

Limahl's chick 'n' chorizo with lemon butter broccoli and butterbeans

There are also treats in Limahl's very cheap meal plan, such as these banana pancakes

Limahl suggests having spaghetti with creme fraiche spinach and chorizo sausage for a luxurious-tasting Friday night dinner

'We noticed that budget chefs love to promote their cheap "price per portion" but then don’t tell you what to do with the rest of the ingredients you’d have to buy to make the recipe.

'Their pricing can seem a bit dishonest, so we developed a flexible meal plan that keeps to a budget, doesn’t waste food, saves you money and still tastes delicious.'

He promises you don't have to be a whizz in the kitchen to follow his recipes, as they're easy enough for even amateurs to pick up.

He has based the costings on own-brand supermarket ingredients, and though he has budgeted for free-range eggs, the meat is unfortunately not sustainably sourced.

Where your budget can stretch, Limahl encourages shoppers to shop ethically - but only if you can afford it.

LIMAHL'S ONE-WEEK MEAL PLAN FOR £18 PER PERSON Sunday Breakfast: Banana pancakes with Madagascan vanilla yoghurt Lunch: Pan-fried Asian style rice cakes Dinner: Lucky chicken bake with Mediterranean roasted vegetables and cous cous Monday Breakfast: Mighty omelette with sundried tomato and bacon Lunch: Leftover lucky chicken bake Dinner: Sammy T's dirty rice Tuesday Breakfast: Pan-fried courgette on toast Lunch: Leftover Sammy T's dirty rice Dinner: Carrot and sweet potato soup with creme fraiche Wednesday Breakfast: Simple bruschetta Lunch: Fresh frittata with bacon and courgette Dinner: Chick 'n' chorizo with lemon butter broccoli Thursday Breakfast: Toasted egg and bacon sandwich Lunch: Leftover chick 'n' chorizo Dinner: Lentil and bacon hotpot with carrots Friday Breakfast: Garlic butter mushrooms on toast Lunch: Leftover lentil and bacon hotpot Dinner: Spaghetti with creme fraiche spinach and chorizo sausage Saturday Breakfast: Shakin' shakshuka Lunch: Spaghetti cake with carrot and courgette ribbon salad Dinner: The best marinated vegetables and rice

Eating frugally can wear a little thin when we are used to having so much choice at supermarkets, but the foodie says these recipes don't compromise on flavour.

There are dashings of luxury here and there - in the meal plan Limahl has shared with us, chorizo is used in a few dishes.

'Budget cooking is all about the clever use of big flavours and we make sure to include the finer ingredients in all our mealplans,' he says.

'You might not find fresh oysters on the menu, but you could certainly find fresh mussels. Usually there’s an alternative "similar" ingredient at a fraction of the cost.

Limahl's simple bruschetta, topped with fresh cherry tomatoes, which he recommends having for breakfast one day

TV chef Jamie Oliver has endorsed the budget cookbook, and tweeted about it on his account

Limahl's lucky chicken bake with Mediterranean roasted vegetables and cous cous is another 86p meal he has created for the cookbook

Six years ago, Limahl Asmall was paying off debts and barely able to pay his sky-high London rent while working for minimum wage

Limahl (behind) and his girlfriend (forefront) fell in love after she made him the 'perfect' chocolate fondant

'For example, a grating of cheddar can replace parmesan in a risotto, and the great thing about specialty herbs and spices is that you only use a little and they will last a long time.'

His next plans involve a budget Christmas week meal plan that will only cost £26 per person, to be released on December 7. He and Tiphaine will also turn the current cookbook into a print edition.

It all seems a lot of work for not much financial reward.

But Limahl says: 'What Tiph and I are doing is bringing a positivity to the budget cooking scene. We want to show that great food is achievable for everyone and that cooking from scratch can be fast, fun and healthy.

'Even more so, it brings families together and the rewards of a delicious bowl of food go far beyond health and nutrition; it can change the way we feel and create real moments of joy.'