And a great deal more besides. The six Rocky movies before “Creed,” to put it kindly, have had their ups and downs. From humble beginnings (and an improbable best picture Oscar, beating out “All the President’s Men,” “Network” and “Taxi Driver”), the series rose in the 1980s to heights of grandiosity and preposterousness before stumbling into irrelevance. But don’t call “Creed” a comeback. After the folly of “Rocky Balboa,” the former champ is out of the ring for good. He’s taken up the role, essential to the genre, of the gruff, grizzled trainer. And Sylvester Stallone, while happy to steal a scene every now and then, cedes the limelight to Michael B. Jordan.

Mr. Jordan plays a talented light-heavyweight whose rapid ascent in the sport is fueled by an identity crisis. Even his name is in question. The love child of Apollo Creed, Rocky’s erstwhile nemesis and eventual best friend, the young man is unsure whether to embrace or spurn the legacy of a father he never knew. He calls himself Adonis (or sometimes Donnie) Johnson, and his background is a complicated tangle of deprivation and privilege. He grew up in foster homes and juvenile detention centers before being adopted by Apollo’s widow, Mary Anne (Phylicia Rashad), who raised him in Los Angeles opulence and kept him away from the boxing ring.

But of course you can’t take the fight out of the boy. Although Adonis is unbeaten in a string of semi-clandestine bouts in Mexico, he is turned away from his father’s former gym. No one in Los Angeles will go against Mary Anne’s wishes and allow her adopted son to participate in the sport that killed her husband. What else can Adonis do? He travels to Philadelphia, where Rocky (Mr. Stallone, as if that needed saying) is running a restaurant and keeping a low profile. He’s all done with boxing, but Adonis persuades him to give it one more try. They start training, and before long a shot at the title materializes, a classic mismatch with a British brawler named Ricky Conlan (Tony Bellew). Like Rocky himself almost 40 years earlier, Adonis is a designated tomato can for a superior fighter.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And like Rocky, Adonis falls for a lovely Philadelphian, a musician named Bianca (Tessa Thompson), who schools him in the local cuisine and the local slang. (“What’s a jawn?” he asks her over cheese steaks.) She teases him for having a white uncle (Adonis’s nickname for Rocky is Unk) and gets mad when she finds out that Adonis has been hiding the truth about his pedigree.

Photo

A boxing movie without clichés is like a political campaign without lies. “Creed,” directed by Ryan Coogler from a script he wrote with Aaron Covington, is self-aware without being cute about it. In the movie as in the world beyond it, Rocky is part of the cultural tapestry. Everyone in Philadelphia knows him. There’s even a statue! But Mr. Coogler, a 29-year-old filmmaker whose debut was “Fruitvale Station” (also starring Mr. Jordan), looks at the Rocky story and the tradition of Hollywood pugilism through a fresh prism.