All Natural Homemade Foundation Powder: For a happy face.

Thank you for supporting this site with purchases made through links in this article.

SIGN UP FOR FREE UPDATES, OFFERS, & TIPS. Plus I'll send you a free copy of "Your Simply Healthy Handbook." It's your #1 resource to make healthy living easy.

Homemade foundation: Let’s do this! I’ve had quite a few requests for a homemade foundation powder. After giving you homemade mascara, homemade blush, bronzer, and lip balm I really wanted to give you a good homemade foundation powder. Of course foundation is tricky. For one, it covers the whole face. It needs to go on well, stay put, match skin tones, and not clog your pores.

A hefty task, indeed.

This has also been a challenge for me on a personal/psychological level. I know. I’m talking about makeup, not some childhood phobia. But after battling acne and bad skin for so long, and relying so heavily on thick foundations to “cover up” my imperfections, I have finally come to a place where I feel really good in my skin. I rarely use makeup at all these days. I don’t know if you can understand just how huge this is.

But still, I’ve been promising a homemade foundation for a long time, so today I’m making good on that promise. Because of its nature, however, there are a few things you should know about the recipe I’m about to give you:

Homemade foundation is not an exact science. It requires some experimentation to get a color that works for you.

This is not like your typical foundation that you buy in the mall, grocery store, or from your Avon rep. It’s totally natural (yay!) but may not “do the job” in the way you are used to. Maybe it will. That really depends on your skin type and your expectations.

Just because it’s all natural doesn’t mean it’s perfect for your skin.

Let’s talk about that third point for just a moment.

If you a familiar with my bronzer recipe you’ll notice that this foundation recipe is very similar. Simple ingredients that you can usually find in your kitchen at any time. Awesome, right? Yes. But you still need to proceed intelligently.

For example:

This recipe, like my bronzer, has the option of using finely ground cinnamon. According to this article, cinnamon can be very beneficial for your skin. But some individuals find that it causes redness. When we remember that herbs and spices are potent and powerful, this makes sense. Depending on our unique set of circumstances, even the most harmless ingredient may not be a good fit. There is nothing toxic in this recipe but I still urge you to try out a sample and decide if this is a good “every day makeup alternative” for you or not.

The good news it that you can make a really tiny batch for sampling. The really good news is that this homemade foundation powder is so so so simple.

This homemade foundation vs. mineral make up

Before I finally said “good bye” to my commercial make up I was wearing a nice (expensive) mineral foundation. And just so you know, there are recipes out there to teach you how to make your own mineral make up and where to get ingredients. And for some, mineral make up is seen to have a lot of benefits.

But I personally still don’t feel completely confident in most of the ingredients. Some ingredients like Mica are common skin irritants. Many contain Titanium Dioxide which I don’t feel really comfortable putting on my face every day. You’d need to do your own research and have a trusted source for quality ingredients if mineral make up interests you. But if your are looking for a homemade foundation that is like your mineral make up, this is a place to start.

Okay, enough stalling. Let’s do this!

Print This!

All Natural Homemade Foundation Powder Ingredients: For the base:

Arrowroot Powder Add one or a combination of:

Cocoa Powder

Ground Cinnamon

Nutmeg Jojoba (like this), Olive, or Almond Oil (optional) Directions: 1. Start with a base of arrowroot powder (1 tsp. for dark skin – 1 Tbs. for light skin)

2. Slowly add in one or combination of the cocoa powder, cinnamon, or nutmeg until you reach your desired tone.

3. If you want more of a “compact” foundation, add some jojoba/olive/almond oil to the mixture and press down into a compact. (Start with 5 drops and keep adding until it reaches your desired texture). Use a brush to apply this homemade foundation. Make sure to tap off excess before swiping face.

You may notice that my foundation is ridiculously light in color… that’s because I’m ridiculously pale. A little cocoa powder for me really is all I need to add. But yours will look different, don’t worry.

Since I know someone will ask for it, here is a before and after picture. It’s subtle, but I do think the homemade foundation smooths things out and takes out some of the redness in my face. Plus it provides a nice “foundation” for any other makeup I might want to put on.

(Sorry for the awkward pics… this is what you get when I have to take them myself.)

Absolutely no make up on the left, only foundation on the right:

Looking for simple, healthy ways to enhance your wellbeing? I thought so.

The internet is full of health-boosting, tips, products, foods and supplements nowadays. The only problems is finding the tried-and-true ways that actually enhance your health and wellbeing at an affordable price.

That’s why I got in touch with my friends at VitaMonk. They create pure, cutting-edge, science-backed supplements that enhance your health and wellbeing.

Their supplements cover everything you need to help you reach and maintain optimal health, wellbeing and performance.

Needless to say, it’s super handy to give your health that little boost.

Best of all – they offer their supplements at a price below cost, because they’re small and trying to grow their business. So stop wasting time and money and check them out right now. Click here to check it out.

There you go, an all natural homemade foundation powder! Have fun. And enjoy how yummy your face will smell, too.