I watch a lot of documentaries. I think they are incredible tools for learning and increasing our awareness of important issues. The power of an interesting documentary is that it can open our minds to new possibilities and deepen our understanding of the world.

On this list of mind expanding documentaries you will find different viewpoints, controversial opinions and even contradictory ideas. Critical thinking is recommended. I’m not a big fan of conspiracy documentaries but I do like films that challenge consensus reality and provoke us to question the everyday ideas, opinions and practices we usually take for granted.

Watching documentaries is one of my favorite methods of self-education. If I find a documentary inspiring, I usually spend more time researching the different ideas and interesting people interviewed in the film.

I hope you find these mind expanding documentaries as enlightening as I did!

Updated: Monday, December 5th, 2016. New section #32 Sustainable Future added.

[1] Life In The Biosphere

Explore the wonder and interconnectedness of the biosphere through the magic of technology.

1. Home

2. The Magical Forest

3. Biosphere

4. Ants: Nature’s Secret Power

5. Mt. Everest: How It Was Made

6. Mariana’s Trench: The Deepest Spot On Earth

7. The Great Bear Rainforest

8. Shining Mountains: The Rockies

9. Grand Canyon: How It Was Made

10. The Intelligence of Plants

[2] Creativity and Design:

Learn about all the amazing things that people dream up and create with their imagination.

1. Everything Is A Remix

2. Raising Creativity

3. Teaching to See

4. Design: The New Business

5. PressPausePlay: Art and Creativity in the Digital Age

6. Infamy: A Graffiti Documentary

7. Influencers: How Trends and Creativity Become Contagious

8. RIP: A Remix Manifesto

9. Connecting: Trends in UI, Interaction, & Experience Design

10. The Genius Of Design

[3] The Education Industrial Complex:

The modern school where young minds are molded into standardized citizens by the state.

1. The College Conspiracy

2. Declining by Degrees: Higher Education at Risk

3. The Forbidden Education

4. Schooling The World

5. College Inc.

6. Education For A Sustainable Future

7. Networked Society: The Future of Learning

8. The Ultimate History Lesson With John Taylor Gatto

9. The Education System in Communist China

10. Courageous Learning

[4] The Digital Revolution:

The Internet is now the driving force behind change and innovation in the world.

1. Download: The True Story of the Internet

2. Cybertopia: The Dreams of Silicon Valley

3. Resonance: Beings of Frequency

5. Life In A Day

6. Networked Society: On The Brink

7. Us Now: Social Media and Mass Collaboration

8. WikiRebels: The WikiLeaks Story

9. The Virtual Revolution: The Cost of Free

10. How Hackers Changed the World

[5] 21st Century Civilization:

Controversial films that raise important questions about our present and future.

1. THRIVE: What On Earth Will It Take?

2. Zeitgeist III: Moving Forward

3. Paradise or Oblivion

4. 2012: Time For Change

5. The Crisis of Civilization

6. The Collective Evolution III

7. The Quickening: Awakening As One

8. Love, Reality, and the Time of Transition

9. Collapse

10. The Awakening

[6] Politics:

Explore the politics of power and control and how it affects your life.

1. Owned and Operated

2. UnGrip

3. The Power Principle

4. The True Story of Che Guevara

5. Earth Days

6. Capitalism Is The Crisis

7. WikiLeaks: The Secret Life of a Superpower

8. The Putin System

9. The War On Democracy

10. Rise Like Lions: Occupy Wall Street and the Seeds of Revolution

[7] Biographies of Genius:

The biographies of modern geniuses who pushed humanity forward.

1. Isaac Newton: The Last Magician

2. Nikola Tesla: The Greatest Mind of All Time

3. The Unlimited Energy of Nicola Tesla

4. The Missing Secrets Of Nikola Tesla

5. Richard Feynman: No Ordinary Genius

6. How Albert Einstein’s Brain Worked

7. The Extraordinary Genius of Albert Einstein

8. The Biography of Albert Einstein

9. Da Vinci: Unlocking The Genius

10. Leonardo Da Vinci: The Man Who Wanted to Know Everything

[8] War:

War is history’s oldest racket for stealing from the powerless and redistributing resources to the powerful.

1. Psywar: The Real Battlefield Is Your Mind

2. The History of World War II

3. The Secret History of 9/11

4. Robot Armies in the Future

5. The Never Ending War in Afghanistan

6. Shadow Company: Mercenaries In The Modern World

7. World War II From Space

8. Unmanned: America’s Drone Wars

9. The Fog Of War

10. The Oil Factor: Behind The War On Terror

[9] Economics:

Learn about the global financial system and how people and societies are enslaved through debt.

1. The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power

2. Overdose: The Next Financial Crisis

3. The Ascent of Money: A Financial History of The World

4. The One Percent

5. Quants: The Alchemists of Wall Street

6. The Great Euro Crisis

7. The Four Horsemen

8. The Secret of Oz

9. Capitalism: A Love Story

10. Money and Life

[10] Digital Entrepreneurship:

Profiles of the entrepreneurs who used technology to change the world.

1. The Life Of A Young Entrepreneur

2. Profile: Google’s Larry Page and Sergey Brin

3. Profile: Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg

4. Starting-Up in America

5. The Biography of Bill Gates

6. Inside Google: The Billion Dollar Machine

7. Steve Jobs: One Last Thing

8 . Steve Jobs: The Man In The Machine

9. Elon Musk: Risk Takers

10. The Story of Twitter

[11] Sports:

Watch the inspiring stories of amazing athletes.

1. Fearless: The Jeb Corliss Story

2. Carts of Darkness

3. Stephen Curry: NBA MVP

4. Usain Bolt: The World’s Fastest Man

5. Wayne Gretzky: The Life and Times

6. Bigger, Faster, Stronger

7. Mike Tyson: Beyond the Glory

8. Muhammed Ali: The Complete Life Story

9. The Legacy Of Michael Jordan

10. We Ride: The Story of Snowboarding

[12] Technology:

Find out more about the impact of exponential growth and the approaching Singularity.

1. The Modern Wonders of the World

2. How Robots Will Change the World

3. What Is The Next Big Thing?

4. Technology of the Future

5. Trance-Formation: The Future of Humanity

6. The Venus Project: Future By Design

7. Bionics, Transhumanism And The End Of Evolution

8. The Singularity Is Near

9. Car Technology Of The Future

10. Powering The Future: The Energy Revolution

[13] Origins of Religion:

Explore the original religious experience of mankind at the dawn of civilization.

1. Entheogen: Awakening the Divine Within

2. Manifesting the Mind: Footprints of the Shaman

3. Ancient Egypt and The Alternative Story of Mankind’s Origins

4. The Hidden Knowledge of the Supernatural

5. Re-Awaken: Open Your Heart, Expand Your Mind

6. Shamans of the Amazon

7. The Root of All Evil: The God Delusion

8. Ancient Knowledge

9. The Naked Truth

10. Lost Gods: A Pagan History

[14] Western Religion:

The fascinating history of the three Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity and Islam.

1. Secret Quest: The Path of the Christian Gnostics

2. The Secret Gate of Eden

3. Forbidden Knowledge: Lost Secrets of the Bible

4. Banned From The Bible: Secrets Of The Apostles

5. The Life of Prophet Muhammad

6. The Road To Armageddon

7. The Most Hated Family In America

8. Muhammad: The Legacy of a Prophet

9. A Complete History of God

10. Gnosis: The Untold History of the Bible

[15] Eastern Religion:

Expand your mind by also studying the entirely different religious worldviews of the East.

1. Inner Worlds, Outer Worlds

2. The Life Of The Buddha

3. The Seven Wonders of the Buddhist World

4. Mysteries of the Cosmic OM: Ancient Vedic Science

5. Where Science and Buddhism Meet

6. The Yogis of Tibet

7. Taj Mahal: Secrets To Blow Your Mind

8. Light at the Edge of the World: Tibetan Science of the Mind

9. Myths of Mankind: The Mahabharata

10. Ayurveda: The Art of Being

[16] Consciousness:

Learn about the basic unity of existence and the miracle of consciousness.

1. Athene’s Theory of Everything

2. Theory of Everything: GOD, Devils, Dimensions, Dragons & The Illusion of Reality

3. The God Within: Physics, Cosmology and Consciousness

4. 5 Gateways: The Five Key Expansions of Consciousness

5. Return to the Source: Philosophy and The Matrix

6. The Holographic Universe

7. DMT: The Spirit Molecule

8. What Is Consciousness?

9. Kymatica

10. Neuroplasticity: The Brain That Changes Itself

[17] Mysteries:

Indiana Jones-style explorations into the unsolved mysteries of the past.

1. Alchemy: Sacred Secrets Revealed

2. The Day Before Disclosure

3. The Pyramid Code

4. The Secret Design of the Egyptian Pyramids

5. Decoding the Past: Secrets of the Dollar Bill

6. The Lost Gods of Easter Island

7. Origins of the Da Vinci Code

8. Forbidden Knowledge: Ancient Medical Secrets

9. Secret Mysteries of America’s Beginnings: The New Atlantis

10. Secrets in Plain Sight

[18] Mass Culture:

Learn about how our thoughts and opinions are influenced by mass culture.

1. The Century of the Self

2. All Watched Over By Machines Of Loving Grace

3. Hypernormalisation

4. The Power Of Nightmares

5. Starsuckers: A Culture Obsessed By Celebrity

6. Human Resources: Social Engineering in the 20th Century

7. Obey: The Death of the Liberal Class

8. Brazil: In the Shadow of the Stadiums

9. Bob Marley: Freedom Road

10. Radiant City

[19] Corporate Media:

Discover how the mass media and advertisers channel our irrational impulses.

1. Weapons of Mass Deceptions

2. Secrets of the Superbrands

3. Orwell Rolls in his Grave

4. The Esoteric Agenda

5. Propaganda

6. The Myth of the Liberal Media: The Propaganda Model of News

7. Manufacturing Consent: Noam Chomsky and the Media

8. Symbolism in Logos: Subliminal Messages or Ancient Archetypes

9. Edward Snowden: A Truth Unveiled

10. Outfoxed: Rupert Murdoch’s War on Journalism

[20] Art and Literature:

Explore the lives of famous artists and how art opens people’s minds.

1. Lord Of The Rings: Facts Behind The Fiction

2. Cosm: Alex Gray’s Visionary Art

3. Jean Michel Basquiat: The Radiant Child

4. New Art and the Young Artists Behind It

5. Salvador Dali: A Master of the Modern Era

6. How Art Made The World: More Human Than Human

7. The Day Pictures Were Born

8. Guns, Germs and Steel

9. Off-Book: Digital Age Creativity

10. This Is Modern Art

[21] Health:

Explore issues in health, how our bodies work and the incredible power of our brains.

1. The Human Brain

2. The Truth About Exercise

3. How To Live To A Hundred

4. Globesity: Fat’s New Frontier

5. The War On Health

6. The Beautiful Truth

7. Food On The Brain

8. The Truth About Food

9. The Truth About Sugar

10. The Living Matrix

[22] Drugs:

Documentaries on the effect of drugs — legal and illegal — on the body and mind.

1. The Union: The Business Behind Getting High

2. The Drugging Of Our Children

3. Northwest Trees

4. Making a Killing: The Untold Story of Psychotropic Drugging

5. Clearing the Smoke: The Science of Cannabis

6. Hofman’s Potion

7. The War on Drugs: The Prison Industrial Complex

8. Are Illegal Drugs More Dangerous Than Legal Drugs?

9. The Prescription Drug Abuse Epidemic

10. Run From The Cure: The Rick Simpson Story

[23] Environment:

Thought-provoking documentaries on the environmental movement and the growing threats to our biosphere.

1. Sharkwater

2. Blue Gold: World Water Wars

3. Tapped

4. Shift: Beyond the Numbers of the Climate Crisis

5. All Things Are Connected

6. The Fight For Amazonia

7. Flow: For Love Of Water

8. Here Comes the Sun

9. The World According To Monsanto

10. The Story of Stuff

[24] Cosmos:

Expand your mind by exploring our indescribably large and beautiful Cosmos.

1. The Search for Planets Similar to Earth

2. Inside the Milky Way Galaxy

3. Cosmic Journeys : The Largest Black Holes in the Universe

4. Beyond The Big Bang

5. The Mystery of the Milky Way

6. Fractals: The Hidden Dimension

7. Into The Universe With Stephen Hawking: The Story of Everything

8. Pioneer Science: Discovering Deep Space

9. Carl Sagan’s Cosmos

10. The Strangest Things In The Universe

[25] Science:

The history of scientific discovery and how scientific instruments expand our perception.

1. A Science Odyssey: Mysteries of the Universe

2. The Quantum Revolution

3. Secret Universe: The Hidden Life of the Cell

4. Stephen Hawking: A Brief History of Time

5. Quantum Mechanics: Fabric of the Cosmos

6. The Light Fantastic

7. DNA: The Secret of Life

8. Parallel Universes, Alternative Timelines & Multiverse

9. What Is The Higgs Boson?

10. Infinity

[26] Evolution:

The story of our evolution and the emergence of self-aware human beings.

1. The Origin of Life

2. Homo Sapiens: The Birth of Humanity

3. Beyond Me

4. The Global Brain

5. Metanoia: A New Vision of Nature

6. Birth Of A New Humanity

7. Samsara

8. Ape Man: Adventures in Human Evolution

9. The Incredible Human Journey

10. The Human Family Tree

[27] Psychology and The Brain:

New research is shining a spotlight on how we can improve our brains.

1. How Smart Can We Get?

2. The Science of Lust

3. DNA: The Secret of Life

4. What Are Dreams?

5. A Virus Called Fear

6. Beyond Thought (Awareness Itself)

7. The Psychology of Narcissism

8. Superconscious Mind: How To Double Your Brain’s Performance

9. Memory Hackers

10. Secrets of the Mind

[28] Modern History:

The story of the Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution and the rise of the modern world.

1. The Entrepreneurs Who Built America

2. History of the World in Two Hours

3. The Industrial Revolution

4. The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich

5. The Adventure of the English Language

6. The French Revolution

7. Big Sugar

8. The Spanish Inquisition

9. The American Revolution

10. The Mexican American War

[29] Pre-Modern History:

The story of the Americas and European history in the pre-modern world.

1. America Before Columbus

2. The Dark Ages

3. Socrates, Aristotle and Plato

4. The Medici: The Most Influencial Family In The World

5. Rome: The Rise And Fall Of An Empire

6. History of Britain: The Myth of the Anglo-Saxon Invasion

7. A History of Celtic Britain

8. The Crusades: Victory and Defeat

9. The Vikings: Voyage To America

10. Copernicus and the Scientific Revolution

[30] Current Events:

Become more informed about current events that are shaping the world.

1. Syria: The Reckoning

2. Empire: Putin’s Russia

3. The New Arms Race

4. State of Surveillance With Edward Snowden

5. Donald Trump’s Road To The White House

6. Inside Obama’s Presidency

7. The Untouchables: How Obama Protected Wall Street

8. Behind The Rhetoric: The Real Iran

9. A History of the Middle East since WWII

10. Brexit: A Very British Coup



[31] Ancient Civilizations:

Fascination explorations into the ancient civilizations of our past.

1. When God Was a Girl: When Goddesses Ruled The Heavens and Earth

2. The Persian Empire : Most Mysterious Civilization in the Ancient World

3. What The Ancients Did For Us

4. What the Ancients Knew

5. Egypt: Beyond the Pyramids

6. Secrets of the Ancient Empires

7. Constellations & Ancient Civilizations

8. Graham Hancock’s Quest For The Lost Civilization

9. Atlantis: The Lost Continent

10. Seven Wonders of the Ancient World

[32] Sustainable Future

1. Origins

2. Zero Waste In Business

3. The Breakthrough In Renewal Energy

4. The Search For Sustainability

5. A Simpler Way: Crisis as Opportunity

6. Cowspiracy: The Sustainability Secret

7. Salmon Confidential

8. Design: e² – Sustainable Architecture

9. Dirt! The Movie

10. Back To Eden

I hope you enjoy watching some of these mind expanding documentaries! If you have a personal favorite, please share it with everyone in the comments.