As a trainer of yoga teachers, I find chakra therapy to be a powerful tool in personal transformation and use this writing exercise during my trainings. The chakra system is a complex energetic system, and chakra balancing is one path that can lead you to spiritual growth.

On a more tangible level, when you discover and become aware of your unique chakra system, you can balance these energetic systems not only to reach higher consciousness, but also to achieve more peace and balance in your everyday life.

The subject can be dense at times, and it's one that you can study for a long time if you'd like to understand it better. However, I find that simply asking a few questions relating to each chakra can provide great insight on where there may be an imbalance in your chakras, and therefore in your life. Record your answers to the questions for each chakra, and you'll go a long way toward balancing your mind, body and life.

1. Muladhara Chakra

The first chakra is where the Kundalini energy lies dormant. Muladhara is the most physical chakra and the energy therefore is grounded and rooted. When this chakra is out of balance, greediness and the desire to hoard appear. When this chakra is in balance, feelings of security, calmness and connectedness to the earth are present.

What is your relationship like with your family?

What is your relationship like with money?

2. Svadhisthana Chakra

The second chakra is the center of creativity and sexuality. When this chakra is out of balance, jealousy, anger, promiscuity and codependency can be found. When this chakra is in balance, creativity and love blossom.

What are ways in which you express your creativity?

Do you feel creatively blocked or open, and why?

3. Manipura Chakra

The third chakra is the seat of power. It's the center of our identity and selfhood. When this chakra is out of balance, the emotional dysfunctions are fear, guilt and intimidation. When the chakra is in balance, there's a strong sense of trust, self-esteem, responsibility and power or strength.

Would you consider yourself an introvert or extrovert?

Reflect on times in your life where you may need to stoke your fire (power) and times when you may needed to contain the flames (power).

4. Anahata Chakra

The fourth chakra is the home of love and compassion. This is the central chakra, where the lower and upper chakras meet. When Anahata is out of balance, feelings of resentment and loneliness exist. When it's in balance, you're at peace with yourself, others and the environment.

What injustices in society break your heart?

Write a forgiveness letter to someone (you do not have to send it unless you want to).

5. Vishudha Chakra

The fifth chakra is the doorway to liberation. It's the center of self-expression. There are 16 petals to represent each of the 16 Sanskrit vowels. When the chakra is out of balance, criticism, bitterness and addiction may be present. When it's in balance, purity of speech, expression and choice are present.

ADVERTISEMENT

List 10 adjectives that best describe you.

Do you tend to be the talker in the conversation or the listener? Does this change with different people in your life? If so, why may that be?

6. Ajna Chakra

The third eye sees the future while the physical eyes see the past and present. This is our center of intuition and wisdom. When the chakra is closed, learning disabilities and untruthfulness may result. Often referred to as “a gut feeling,” when the third eye is open we intuitively find the answers to our own questions. When the relationship of the self and the spirit are heightened, there's great access to inner resources and insight.

If you had one question to ask a psychic, what would you ask?

Name a time when you listened to your intuition and it worked, and name a time you didn't follow your intuition and the results were unfavorable.

7. Sahasrara

The last chakra is the highest both physically and spiritually. The individual merges with the whole here creating oneness with the universal life force. When the chakra is blocked, genetic disorders and selfishness may occur. When the chakra is spinning open, one feels spiritually alive and connected.

How does the word God resonate with you?

Identify the times when you feel the most connected to your spirituality.

Photo Credit: Shutterstock.com