



THE BIRTH CHART - YOUR COSMIC BARCODE Create your chart below





The degree of each planet is not needed to construct this chart. Why is the Whole Sign House system still used? Because it works! I use a combination of the Whole Sign House system as well as Western Astrology (using your planet in sign placement with the exact degrees) including the symbolic meaning of each planet and sign, sign rulers, elements, qualities and more. To avoid confusion, we will only use the Traditional Horoscope method to construct your chart and you will discover which signs rule the houses in your personal horoscope.



The band of the sky in which the planets move is called the Zodiac. The Zodiac is divided into 12 Signs, each of which contains 30 degrees (1/12th of a circle). The complete zodiac circle is 360 degrees.



At the bottom of the page you will find a zodiac wheel divided into 12 pie shaped slices. The Ascendant (1st house) is at 9 o'clock on the wheel. This is the first house in your horoscope and your Rising Sign. This sign is as important as your Sun Sign and of significant importance in everyone’s horoscope. Take the link on any page to Calculate your Rising Sign. It’s free for you to use and accurate if you know your exact birth time. If you do not know your birth time, use 12:00 noon, but keep in mind that your 1st house position is not guaranteed. You can find your birth time on your birth certificate or you may want to contact the hospital in which you were born. Most hospitals keep a record of births with vital information that is not always recorded on the birth certificate.



There is an order used to place each sign of the zodiac onto the wheel. Your Ascendant, the sign that governs your first house, is now in the 9 o'clock slice of pie. You can draw this out very easily on paper and place your corresponding houses on the appropriate slice of pie. Or else, you can list them from 1-12 as you are not concerned with the angles, just the house order.



Next, going around the wheel counter-clockwise the following house is your 2nd house, the next house is the 3rd and so on until you reach the last house, which is your 12th house. Now you're back at your first house again.



The sign order is always the same in the zodiac, but you will start at



The natural order of the signs is: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.



If your Rising Sign (1st house Ascendant) is Scorpio, place Scorpio 1st at 9 o'clock. Then follow the natural order of the signs: Sagittarius 2nd, Capricorn 3rd, Aquarius 4th, Pisces 5th, Aries 6th, Taurus 7th, Gemini 8th, Cancer 9th, Leo 10th, Virgo 12th and you're back at Scorpio, the first house.



I told you it was easy! Now you know which signs govern the houses in your horoscope. Visit the



These directions are provided for those individuals that are not familiar with their birth chart, but who would like the opportunity to construct their birth chart without having to learn various methods and procedures. Although simple, it is nonetheless accurate



A horoscope includes much more than a birth chart and house positions. This is only a starting point.



Create your chart







Free Interactive Birth Chart



Hover your mouse over the chart and click on any planet, house, or sign, to get a full aspect list. You can choose the option below the interactive birth chart to display Asteroids, Ascendant and Midheaven, a list of Aspects and detailed positions of the planets.



If you would like to learn a simple method by which you can erect your own birth chart, this is very easy for anyone to follow. You will use the ancient technique of the Whole Sign House system. This is the system by which I learned Astrology and is performed by Traditional Astrologers todayThe degree of each planet is not needed to construct this chart.Why is the Whole Sign House system still used? Because it works! I use a combination of the Whole Sign House system as well as Western Astrology (using your planet in sign placement with the exact degrees) including the symbolic meaning of each planet and sign, sign rulers, elements, qualities and more. To avoid confusion, we will only use the Traditional Horoscope method to construct your chart and you will discover which signs rule the houses in your personal horoscope.The band of the sky in which the planets move is called the Zodiac. The Zodiac is divided into 12 Signs, each of which contains 30 degrees (1/12th of a circle). The complete zodiac circle is 360 degrees.At the bottom of the page you will find a zodiac wheel divided into 12 pie shaped slices. The(1st house) is at 9 o'clock on the wheel. This is the first house in your horoscope and your Rising Sign. This sign is as important as your Sun Sign and of significant importance in everyone’s horoscope. Take the link on any page to Calculate your Rising Sign. It’s free for you to use and accurate if you know your exact birth time. If you do not know your birth time, use 12:00 noon, but keep in mind that your 1st house position is not guaranteed. You can find your birth time on your birth certificate or you may want to contact the hospital in which you were born. Most hospitals keep a record of births with vital information that is not always recorded on the birth certificate.There is an order used to place each sign of the zodiac onto the wheel. Your Ascendant, the sign that governs your first house, is now in the 9 o'clock slice of pie. You can draw this out very easily on paper and place your corresponding houses on the appropriate slice of pie. Or else, you can list them from 1-12 as you are not concerned with the angles, just the house order.Next, going around the wheel counter-clockwise the following house is your 2nd house, the next house is the 3rd and so on until you reach the last house, which is your 12th house. Now you're back at your first house again.The sign order is always the same in the zodiac, but you will start at your 1st house and place the following signs in each pie shaped slice until you are back at your 1st house again.The natural order of the signs is: Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces.If your Rising Sign (1st house Ascendant) is Scorpio, place Scorpio 1st at 9 o'clock. Then follow the natural order of the signs: Sagittarius 2nd, Capricorn 3rd, Aquarius 4th, Pisces 5th, Aries 6th, Taurus 7th, Gemini 8th, Cancer 9th, Leo 10th, Virgo 12th and you're back at Scorpio, the first house.I told you it was easy! Now you know which signs govern the houses in your horoscope. Visit the Houses page and read more about what areas each house covers in your horoscope. Read the planets page to learn about which planets have rulership over each of the signs and how they influence the sign and house in your horoscope. Each month when the sun changes signs, you will already know what areas will become a focus for you. Astrology really does work!These directions are provided for those individuals that are not familiar with their birth chart, but who would like the opportunity to construct their birth chart without having to learn various methods and procedures. Although simple, it is nonetheless accurateA horoscope includes much more than a birth chart and house positions. This is only a starting point.