In the end, though, finding the right weather app is really a matter of personal taste in the design, how much information you want and, crucially, how much you trust the forecast. And there is a bit of a philosophical difference brewing in terms of how those forecasts are created.

Now, weather apps are often powered by one of a few sources of information, including the Weather Channel and Weather Underground (both of which are owned by the Weather Company), and Weatherbug and AccuWeather.

The forecasts coming from those services combine data from the National Weather Service, weather balloons, satellites, NASA and local stations dotted all over the country, as well as various other sensors. All of that raw information forms a rough picture of what’s happening in the atmosphere at any given time.

Photo

Then, a meteorologist usually comes in to interpret and analyze the data and, based on a mix of experience and education, chooses the information on which to base a forecast.

The data and forecasts created in that way power many weather apps. The Weather Channel provides Apple’s built-in forecasts, for example, while Weather Underground provides data for Google’s weather and powers Yahoo Weather.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Those data and forecast providers all have their own apps as well. The Weather Channel app, for example, offers useful information like airport conditions and flu outbreak updates by region, while Weather Underground has the richest (and geekiest) information. For my taste, Weatherbug is the best app offered by the main providers, because it offers niceties like the ability to sort your forecast by whether it’s a good day for golf or one that is likely to cause dry skin.

But the folks behind Dark Sky, a popular and visually stunning weather app, are doing things a bit differently. That company formed about three years ago to create a new kind of forecast that would use radar data to predict whether it was going to rain — or stop raining — in an immediate location and within the next hour.

No one was really doing that, said Adam Grossman, a co-creator of the Dark Sky app. So the company had to build its own computer programs for figuring out radar data for that one example: Is it going to be raining an hour from now in this one, specific spot?

That work evolved into longer-term forecasting, and led to a separate product called Forecast. Mr. Grossman says the weather predictions all come from computers; no meteorologists are involved. Algorithms compare predictions from various stations or weather sources with historical accuracy and spit out purely statistical predictions.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“We get a lot of flak from meteorologists who say computers can’t do it and you always need a human in there to call the shots,” Mr. Grossman said. “But humans are really bad at forecasting. When it comes to weather forecasting it’s best to leave it to the computers.”

It’s a bit like “Moneyball” hits weather prediction — the idea that statistical models can, in the long run, offer better forecasts than a mix of information and gut instinct.

But the folks at the Weather Channel say there are plenty of computers involved in their forecasting — and humans who know how to make the most of the data, too.

Photo

“We’re an organization that employs hundreds of meteorologists, plus the computational science required to produce the forecast and then deploy it,” said Kevin Doerr, who manages consumer digital products at the Weather Channel. “That ends up being kind of our secret sauce. There’s a big difference between whether you’re just taking the data and pushing it out, and improving or augmenting the data.”

The forecast model for longer-term predictions is new, and still evolving. But so far, the secret sauce scores higher, at least according to ForecastWatch, an organization that tracks the accuracy of weather forecast providers. (Yes, that exists.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

ForecastWatch runs ForecastAdvisor, a site that lets you plug in your ZIP code and track the accuracy of forecasts from major weather services. Based on ForecastAdvisor, the most accurate forecasts for Midtown Manhattan over the last month came from AccuWeather (whose app is straightforward but lacks extras and can be hard to read at times). It was right 85 percent of the time. Dark Sky was next, with 84 percent accuracy. Weather Underground was third for the month. Over the course of a year, top honors go to MeteoGroup, a weather forecaster based in Europe.

In San Francisco, though, Dark Sky has fared poorly against AccuWeather, the Weather Channel and Weather Underground. None of them, though, has had higher than 82 percent accuracy there. Mr. Grossman pointed out that under “further accuracy analysis” on ForecastAdvisor, Dark Sky’s precipitation accuracy ranks high, and that ForecastAdvisor tracks just daily highs and lows rather than the hourly temperature predictions Dark Sky might excel at.

So, as always when it comes to the weather, there’s much to discuss and few clear answers. But as forecasting grows more advanced and the data is more accessible to app makers, Mr. Grossman said, developers would experiment with presenting it in more interesting and useful ways.

“For some people, wind is very important; for others, rain is very important,” he said. “But another branch is people who are supplementing things, not necessarily weather. Apps with calendar information can tell people they might want to leave a little early because rain is coming.”

And weather, always a reliable topic of conversation, is social in apps, too. The Weather Channel’s app lets people report the weather in their immediate area and even upload photos — all of which helps the app improve its hyperlocal accuracy. And the Weather Underground app lets you upload hazards like downed power lines and blackouts.

Perhaps my favorite new weather app is TheVane, which gives you the forecast along with wardrobe suggestions (women’s only, for now) and even links to buy the outfits pictured. It will suggest outfits for travel based on location and long-term forecast, and even generate a packing list.

Now that is how you add a human touch to the weather.