After performing 40 hours of research, conducting extensive testing with a PhD physicist, and interviewing a guy who made his living stealing other people’s discarded personal information, we feel confident in recommending the $50 AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut Paper/CD/Credit Card Shredder to most people who shred things a few times per month. It was our pick when this guide was originally published last year, and after a new round of testing, we’ve confirmed it’s still the best for personal use or light duty in a home office. But we do have two new alternate picks for this 2015 update. We’ve added a pick for a high-capacity shredder for frequent users and a new choice for exceptional security.

Right after we published this guide our pick became unavailable at Amazon. So we added an alternative suggestion below for what to get if you need a new shredder before the Amazon model comes back in stock.

Three years ago: Our main pick is out of stock at Amazon (again), but we do have an alternate pick listed below.

Our AmazonBasics pick is back in stock at Amazon, and we have some new long-term testing data from one of our editors who's been using the shredder for nearly a year.

After we interviewed a man who made his living stealing discarded personal data and then tested paper shredders with a physicist, we recommend the $50 AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut for your paper-document, credit-card, or data-DVD-shredding needs. It was our pick last year, and we still couldn't find a shredder with comparable shredding capacity for the same low price.

Although we haven't yet tested any new shredders in 2016, we have gone through this guide and made some minor changes to keep our descriptions of the AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut Shredder and its competitors up to date. We still think the AmazonBasics model is the best shredder for most people.

It appears that our top pick, the AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut , is not available. We’ve reached out to Amazon for more information, and will update this guide when we know more.

After months of inconsistent stock, we’re now confident that our top pick, the AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut , is no longer offered by Amazon. We’ve called in two new AmazonBasics paper shredders for testing—the 6-Sheet Cross-Cut and the 8-Sheet Cross-Cut . After some preliminary comparisons, we’re confident that either new shredder is a suitable replacement for our now-discontinued top pick. We’ll conduct further testing to determine each model’s Flaws but not dealbreakers , and we’ll update this guide in the coming weeks.

Based on our research, we feel that most people, given how seldom a shredder sees action, would prefer to spend $50 on a reliable machine that can get a basic job done compared to one that costs two or three times the price. For most average folks, a shredder is a device that has to work well a few times a month—and for the occasional batch of paperwork, old bank cards, CDs, or DVDs, this is a very competent shredder at a reasonable price.

While the AmazonBasics shredder is not the most powerful shredder we could find, the product is rated to shred a dozen pages at once. We found in tests it can handle up to 19 sheets. But the reason it became the top pick was its unique combination of low price and exceptional capacity—you’d be hard-pressed to find anything else this capable at this price.

As the name suggests, it’s capable of reducing your sensitive papers, credit cards, and data DVDs to secure, difficult-to-reassemble bits. It can also handle paper clips and staples, although a foreign object sensor automatically disables the shredding blades if a curious little finger gets too close. It proved difficult to jam but easy to maintain, and the 4.7-gallon bin (which held an average of 142 pages) is relatively convenient to empty.

But if your shredding needs (and volume) reach beyond tax time, a few monthly bills, or the occasional expired credit card, consider spending $175 on the Fellowes 100% Jam Proof Shredder, 73Ci 12-Sheet Cross Cut shredder. The 73Ci replaces last year’s step-up pick, the Fellowes 99Ci, which was a more expensive, higher capacity shredder from the same product line.

Upgrading from the AmazonBasics to the Fellowes 73Ci gives you jam-free operation, a high-stamina motor, quieter operation, an easy to empty slide-out waste bin, built-in energy saving technology, and an excellent warranty. The shredder automatically clears paper jams, not that it jams all that often—a sensor in the shredder keeps the hardware from starting if it detects more than 12 sheets at a time. It was the second-quietest shredder in our test. The motor never overheated, even after running 120 sheets of paper in 10 back-to-back batches of a dozen pages apiece.

Compared to our AmazonBasics pick, the 73Ci can run for longer before it needs to shut down and cool off, and its 5.4-gallon bin has a little more storage. The electronics conserve power while the shredder is in use or idle. The blades have an industry-leading five year warranty. And, like the AmazonBasics, sensors automatically shut down the shredder’s blades when a hand touches the paper feed slot.

This is a great choice for anyone with a lot of shredding to do—and it’s a better product than the AmazonBasics pick—but given the high price, it’s overkill for a home that only occasionally needs a shredder.

While this level of shredding security is overkill for most people, if you have extremely sensitive documents (or you’re just extra paranoid), you might sleep better at night knowing that your personal or business papers have been all but obliterated. You’ll want to check out the AmazonBasics 12-Sheet High Security Micro-Cut Paper, CD, and Credit Card Shredder with Pullout Basket. It’s a $100 shredder that can turn paper into 5/32″ x 15/32″ bits of confetti 12 sheets at a time—and it’ll do the same for credit cards and CDs—then store it all in its pull-out 6.7-gallon (4.8 gallons of usable space) bin. At 57 decibels, it was the quietest shredder we tested. While its between-cycle cooldown takes 15 minutes longer than our AmazonBasics cross-cut pick and 25 minutes longer than the 73Ci, $100 is a great price for the additional peace of mind that this shredder can provide.

Our main pick for $50 can make your documents very difficult to reassemble—and for double the price, this one makes it all but impossible.

Table of contents

How we picked and tested

The basic goal of a paper shredder is to reduce a document, data disc, credit card, or whatever else you run through it into tiny bits, confounding an attempt to reassemble the physical data into something that can be read and taken advantage of.

To find the best tools for this job, I started with editorial reviews. In the time since I first wrote this guide back in 2013, not much has changed. WIRED tested out a number of shredders early that same year, but most were prohibitively expensive, designed for use in offices. Apartment Therapy produced a guide to paper shredders around the same time, but they focused almost entirely on Amazon user reviews instead of testing. PC Magazine and PC World both looked at shredders recently, but their picks were all relatively pricy and not specifically geared for home use. A buying guide produced by Consumer Reports is now several years old, and in 2015, a number of the machines CR tested are no longer produced or available for sale. That said, Consumer Reports did provide some valuable background information on what their test lab staff felt makes for a great shredder. We also looked to a number of other publications like The New York Times, Good Housekeeping, House Beautiful, and Consumerist to determine what features we were looking for when selecting test hardware.

In the end, we came up with the a shortlist of things to look for in a paper shredder for home use or for use in a home office:

As a minimum, it should be a cross-cut shredder (level three security), which cuts documents into smaller, hard-to-recover pieces sized anywhere from ⅛” to ¼” (3.9 mm to 5.8 mm). Level three shredding is widely considered to provide enough diligence to secure sensitive confidential contractual materials, corporate data and personal information handled by administrative personnel in an office setting.

A shredder should have a large enough storage drum so that you’re not constantly having to empty it (4 gallons for home, 8 for a small business).

Paper’s not the only thing it should shred. It should also make quick work of credit cards and old data CDs/DVDs, and be able to deal with paper clips or staples.

A shredder should be easy to maintain. Jams should be easy to correct—a reverse gear is very helpful, and automatic jam-clearing is excellent.

Quieter is better, for obvious reasons. But that silence shouldn’t come at the expense of shredding power.

It should be safe; it should shut down as soon as it encounters any objects other than what it has been designed to shred.

The product should be protected by a warranty.

Once we had a basic list of features to look for, we went on the hunt for hardware that met all the requirements. In the end, we wound up ordering seven different shredders:

We also tested the Fellowes AutoMax 130 C—a small office shredder with an auto-feed 130-sheet hopper and eight-page manual feed slot. We didn’t ask for it, it was included in the shipment of loaner hardware sent to us by Fellowes. Having it on hand, it seemed like a shame not to tinker with it.

We then turned the reins over to a frequent partner in crime, Dr. Jim Shapiro. Jim has a physics degree from MIT, as well as a Masters of Science and a PhD in mathematical physics from UCLA. He has worked in geophysics in the petroleum industry and as a teacher; he’s also written one book on the inner workings of everyday hardware and another called In Your Head that explores the limits of mental calculations. In other words, he can make accurate, objective observations on the workings of most any piece of hardware. Jim tested this year’s batch of shredders using the following criteria:

We put ten batches of 12 sheets of paper (or more, depending on the shredder’s recommended maximum load) through each shredder in quick succession to see if it would jam or overheat under normal operating conditions.

We measured the maximum number of sheets of paper that can be shredded at once (tested using 20 pound, 75 g/m generic letter-sized paper) without jamming.

We measured the size of the individual shreddings.

We checked to see if the shredder can destroy a CD (and by default, as they’re more flimsy, a credit card.)

We measured the machines’ decibel level from a few feet away while shredding.

We estimated its maintenance: Does it jam often, how easy is it to clear jams, and does it regularly overheat during operation?

We measured how much the shredder’s wastebasket could hold, compared that to the capacity claimed by the manufacturer, and noted how easy it is to empty the shredder.

Our pick

If you occasionally use a shredder to safely dispose of bills, tax papers, checkbooks, credit cards, data discs or other sensitive personal materials, we found that the $50 AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut Paper/CD/Credit Card Shredder is your best bet. Most people aren’t shredding huge amounts of paper on a regular basis; they simply need something that can effectively and securely discard their personal information a few times per month. The AmazonBasics works with minimal headaches, is impossible to jam if used as advised, can be pushed to take 19 sheets of paper if you really want to, and costs fifty bucks.

We think that most people, given how seldom a shredder sees action, shouldn’t pay any more than the minimum amount for a reliable, competent device. That’s why this has remained our recommended shredder for two years in a row.

The AmazonBasics shredder is a medium-duty cross-cut shredder, designed to shred up to 600 pages of standard letter-sized paper a day—that’s a capacity that even a heavy user will have a hard time exceeding. Once items pass through the AmazonBasics, they’re processed into 2″ by .25” rectangles. That’s a small enough size to make it very difficult for someone to put the original document back together again. As for the hardware itself, the AmazonBasics shredder is 8.9″ x 12.5″ x 15.7″ in size and, with nothing in its waste bin, weighs just a little over 12 pounds.

In testing, the AmazonBasics did everything we expected it to do, and then some. The shredder is designed to handle up to 12 sheets of paper up to 9” in width at a time. But in his testing, Jim found that he was able to feed a stack of up to 19 sheets of standard letter-sized printer paper into the shredder before it jammed.

Jim found that he was able to feed a stack of up to 19 sheets of standard letter-sized printer paper into the shredder before it jammed.

That said, you’re better sticking to Amazon’s recommended load of 12 sheets at a time, especially since the thickness and density of the paper stock you’re shredding can vary. The shredder can also manage staples and paperclips, and as its name suggests, it’s designed to slice up CDs, DVDs and credit cards, a task it completes with a secondary slot and set of dedicated blades. By offering users a separate set of blades to use solely on tougher materials, the chances of dulling the shredder’s main cutting blades are reduced, as is the possibility of plastic gumming up the works.

According to Amazon, the shredder is designed to have a five minute runtime before needing to cool down for 30 minutes. That’s roughly average for most of the shredders we tested. However, during the course of our testing, Jim was unable to force the hardware to shut down due to overheating.

The shredder comes with three settings: Auto, which will start shredding paper as soon as it senses paper has been inserted into the device’s feed slot, Off (if I need to explain this, I just don’t know if I can help you), and Reverse, which users can engage to help them clear out a paper jam. All three functions are controlled by a single switch.

Speaking of paper jams, provided you follow the operating instructions, you’ll have a difficult time jamming the AmazonBasics shredder. During the course of testing, Jim was able to pass 120 sheets of paper in 10 batches of 12 pages through the AmazonBasics hardware, one after the other, without the shredder jamming up or overheating. We mentioned earlier that Jim was able to grind the shredder to a halt by feeding 19 sheets of paper into it at once, providing him an opportunity to see how easily you could clear a paper jam. Using the shredder’s reverse gear didn’t fix it, but he found that a little gentle tugging of the wad of paper back out of the maw cleared the jam.

That said, if you were to encounter a more stubborn jam, the design makes it easy to get to the root of the problem. Like many other similarly-sized shredders, the motor and blades are all contained in a single housing that sits on top of the storage bin. Unplug the shredder, remove the housing from the bin and flip it over to reveal the blades. (It’s worth mentioning that this exposes some of the shredder’s blades, which are, you know, sharp, so be careful when you’re handling the hardware in this manner.

In addition to solid performance, the AmazonBasics shredder comes packing a number of safety features. In order to help keep little fingers or the nose of an inquisitive pooch from futzing with the shredder’s blades, a flap covers up the paper feed slot when it’s not in use. This plastic cover can also be snapped into position to provide an opening that’s only large enough to slip paper into, making for safer operation. As a failsafe to the shredder’s flap, the AmazonBasics has ‘ShredSafe’ technology, which cuts power to the shredder instantly if the flap is forced open, if a foreign object is introduced into the shredder’s paper slot, or if the device’s blade/motor housing are removed from the storage bin. In Jim’s testing, all of the safety features performed as advertised.

Its performance, reliability, and ease of use is enough to make it the most popular shredder on Amazon, with an average 4.1-star rating and 2,126 five-star reviews out of a total of 3,823. We weren’t able to find a trusted editorial source that has written about it. But with the number of people reportedly satisfied by the shredder’s performance along with how well it has performed for us over these past two years in a controlled test environment, we feel confident recommending this piece of hardware to you.

Flaws but not dealbreakers

While the AmazonBasics shredder is reasonably priced and works well, it’s loud. Jim found at a distance of a few feet away—roughly where most folks would be sitting while feeding paper into the hardware—the shredder generated 68 decibels, which is roughly the same amount of noise generated by a vacuum cleaner. The only shredder that was louder than the AmazonBasics shredder in this year’s round of testing was, at 69 decibels, the Swingline 12 Sheet Paper Shredder, Super Cross-Cut Junk Mail Shredder.

It’s annoying, but remember: you don’t run a shredder constantly. You turn it on when you’re shredding and off when you’re not. So unless you’re minding a sleeping baby or trying to secretly dispose of correspondence from an affair, most people should be able to live with the noise this thing makes. It’s also worth mentioning that the hardware was able to make short work of both staples and paperclips, but, like most of the hardware we tested, running staples through it isn’t advised as steel staples are tough enough to futz with the edge of the shredder blades.

Amazon claims that the shredder comes equipped with a respectably-sized 4.8-gallon bin to collect all of your shredded materials in. But upon checking its true capacity, we discovered that the bin could hold only 4.7 gallons. That’s not far off the mark (and a lot better than some of the hardware we talk about in the competition section) but worth noting nonetheless. For convenience’s sake, the bin has a small transparent plastic window built into it to make it possible to see how much space is left in it without having to remove the shredder’s top housing from the shredder. We found that the bin could hold an average of 142 shredded pages before it needed to be emptied.

It’s also worth mentioning that the shredder’s blade and motor housing has no handles. As such, it’s more of a pain to remove or empty than it could be. But given the price of this piece of hardware, the overwhelming amount of user satisfaction shown by Amazon users, and how well it has performed for us these past two years, these are all fairly minor flaws to complain about.

An upgrade for heavy shredder users

If your shredding needs go beyond that of a typical home user and you’re willing to pay more for features that our $50 AmazonBasics pick can’t match, then you’ll want the $165 Fellowes 100% Jam Proof Shredder, 73Ci 12-Sheet Cross Cut. The extra $115 you’ll fork over will net you quieter operation, a larger waste storage bin, a longer run time before overheating, a superior warranty, and a number of features that all but guarantee a jam-free shredding experience.

Weighing in at close to 25 pounds and being 21.25″ x 9″ x 15.5″ in size, the 73Ci is substantially heavier and larger than our AmazonBasics pick. But moving the shredder’s additional heft around your home ain’t no thing, thanks to the fact that it comes on a set of caster wheels. The 73Ci’s larger frame contains a six-gallon (measured as 5.4 gallons in our tests) waste bin that pulls out of the shredder like a drawer, making it a lot easier to manhandle and empty than our cheaper AmazonBasics pick.

The 73Ci is operated by three buttons: power, forward and reverse. When turned on, the shredder senses when paper is fed into it and automatically begins to shred. This same sensor determines the thickness of the paper being fed into it—and also makes the 73Ci practically jam-proof. The sensor simply will not allow the shredder to start if it detects more than 12 sheets of paper being loaded into its paper slot at a time. Additionally, if it senses a jam is imminent during operation, the 73Ci will automatically reverse its blades to prevent the problem from occurring before refeeding the paper and attempting the shred again. If all of this fails to stop a jam from occurring, it’s also possible to manually reverse the shredder’s motor to clear the obstruction. Oh, and if you like to live dangerously, this auto-jam system can be disabled by pushing the forward and reverse buttons simultaneously.

Just like when he was testing our AmazonBasics shredder, Jim was able to speed 120 sheets of paper through the 73Ci with no problems to speak of. The shredder also made short work of CDs and paper clips. It’ll do staples too, but as with all of the hardware we tested this year, the manufacturer recommends against attempting to do so if you can avoid it.

Of the personal shredders we tested, the 73Ci also proved to be one of the quietest—a major advantage compared to the AmazonBasics tool, one of the loudest.

While we were unable to overheat the Fellowes 73Ci during the course of testing, it’s worth mentioning that the 73Ci has a superior operation/rest cycle to our main pick: It can operate continuously for 10 minutes before requiring a 20-minute cool down period. If you’re one to save up your paperwork for months at a time before securely disposing of it, this longer duty cycle and shorter downtime, in combination with a larger waste bin, will let you speed through shredding faster than the less expensive AmazonBasics machine can.

Of the personal shredders we tested, the 73Ci also proved to be one of the quietest—a major advantage compared to the AmazonBasics tool, one of the loudest. This is actually quite a nice touch, because it’s easy to imagine a situation when you’d prefer to be using the machine without anyone knowing about it—a paranoid boss, a jealous spouse, the list goes on. Or, even if you’re not shredding in secret, it could be just courteous to have a shredder that doesn’t bother your family or coworkers every time it fires up.

Another thing that this piece of kit has going for it is its widespread availability: The Fellowes 73Ci can be bought through a number of online channels like Amazon, Office Depot, Staples, and Grand & Toy. Usually, chances are, you’ll have no trouble getting your hands on one.

Finally, it’s worth noting the Fellowes Ci line of shredders come in a number of different sizes. The $265 Fellowes 3229901 PowerShred 99Ci 17 Sheet Cross-Cut Shredder, for example, offers the same safety and convenience features of the 73Ci, but it can handle 17 pages at once and comes with a larger nine-gallon waste bin. In last year’s version of this guide, we chose the 99Ci as our top choice for a shredder to use in a small office. This year, we felt the 73Ci, despite having less capacity, was worth saving a hundred bucks. No matter which version of the device you buy, Fellowes provides a five-year warranty on the shredder’s blades and a year’s worth of coverage for the rest of the hardware.

The feedback from folks that bought the 73Ci from these was overwhelmingly positive. Amazon shoppers awarded the shredder with a 4.5-star average, with 1,281 out of 1,821 awarding it five stars. On top of this, Good Housekeeping gave the Fellowes 73Ci a ‘B’ rating, citing its safety, ability to shred large amounts of documents without overheating, and Fellowes’ responsive customer service.

Flaws but not dealbreakers

Despite the positive feedback for the Fellowes 73Ci, we’ve got a few issues with it. For starters, this thing, being 24 pounds and 21.25″ x 9″ x 15.5″ in size, is large enough and heavy enough that you’ll want to contemplate where you plan on placing it and using it, especially when you consider that its 24-pound weight doesn’t account for the heft of any paper or other media shredded in the bin. So it might not be a great choice for tight spaces, or for people who could have a hard time emptying it out.

But above all, honestly, $165 is a lot of money to spend on a single-purpose piece of hardware that most folks will only need to use a few times a month. So please, before taking a pass on our $50 AmazonBasics pick in favor of the 73Ci, take a few moments to seriously consider your needs. Some people really do need a faster, quieter, more heavy-duty product ready to tackle several shredding sessions per week, but most people probably don’t. If you know you’ll use it enough to justify the additional dough this will set you back, then more power to you. It’s a great shredder.

For a higher level of security

This shredder made the least amount of operating noise of any piece of hardware we tested this year—57 decibels.

A cross-cut shredder like our main pick makes it very difficult for an identity thief to steal your information, but there’s an even higher level of security: a micro-cut shredder like the AmazonBasics 12-Sheet High Security Micro-Cut Paper, CD, and Credit Card Shredder with Pullout Basket. This $100 shredder can turn paper into 5/32″ x 15/32″ bits of confetti, 12 sheets at a time. These particles are roughly six times smaller than those produced by a cross-cut shredder, making it a suitable solution for use in banks to comply with the LB act for protection of consumer financial information or hospitals to meet HIPAA standards. This shredder’s output is basically impossible for a thief to reassemble into a readable document.

For all its document-chopping power, this shredder made the least amount of operating noise of any piece of hardware we tested this year—57 decibels. That’s about the same sound as someone have a relatively animated conversation. This weighs in at just under 26 pounds with set of wheels and a handle to help move it around. With a bin on casters, the shredder is easy to empty. It can be rescued from a paper jam with a few strong tugs or by using the manual reverse gear. A separate slot chews up credit cards and data disks, and the paper slot can also deal with paper clips and staples. It doesn’t have a sensor to detect foreign objects entering the blades, but it does have an angled feeding opening that would be very difficult to accidentally engage with, say, a finger. Amazon covers the hardware with a one year warranty.

Flaws but not dealbreakers

Amazon’s writeup on the hardware claims that the device comes with a 6.7-gallon bin, which is designed to slide out of the shredder’s chassis. Our testing, however, revealed that the bin could only hold 4.8 gallons of shredded material—almost two gallons less than the manufacturer claimed. Jim reported that micro-cut shredded material compacts more neatly than the stuff shredded up by a cross-cut shredder, so you won’t have to empty it as often as you would the AmazonBasics cross-cut model, which has a bin that’s almost the same size. This seemingly misstated capacity left us wondering, and we’ve reached out for comment.

The new competition for the 2015 update

An excellent shredder that was very nearly a step-up pick this year was the $270 Fellowes Powershred 450Ms SafeSense 7-sheet Micro-Cut Shredder. We tested it for last year’s guide and recommended it as a pricey, powerful hardware option for anyone that requires a high level of physical data security. The 450Ms obliterated paper, credit cards and data discs into particles 0.5” x 0.2” in size. It comes packing the same safety technologies and anti-jamming features to the Fellowes 73Ci, and the spacious 5.5 gallon slide-out waste bin has plenty of room. Like all of Fellowes’ higher end hardware, the 450Ms is covered by a warranty that guarantees the shredder’s blades for five years and the rest of the device for a year after the date of purchase. The big caveat here, aside from the high price, is that it can only destroy seven pages at a time. Not many shredders of this type are speed demons, so that roughly fits what you’d expect from the micro-cut category. If your business or peace of mind requires this level of security, then slower speed is likely something you can live with.

The Swingline 12-Sheet Paper Shredder, Super Cross-Cut Junk Mail Shredder costs $10 more than our $50 step-down Amazon pick. It proved capable of shredding up to 15 sheets at once—three more than the item we recommended. Unfortunately, it was also the only shredder to overheat during testing. The hardware shut down after four minutes of continuous use and couldn’t be turned back on for 20 minutes. Add to this the fact that Swingline recommends against running staples or paperclips through the shredder (the rest of the hardware we tested chewed paperclips with no problem). That alone makes it hard for us to recommend the device. Also, while writing this guide, the Swingline went out of stock on Amazon a couple of times. Whether this is due to the fact that tax time is upon us and supplies are getting tight or the company is discontinuing the hardware is up for debate. No matter what the answer is, we suggest you avoid this one.

The Aurora JamFree AU1240XA 12-Sheet Cross-Cut Paper / Credit Card Shredder is made by the same company that produces our AmazonBasics step down pick. It was the only model that correctly reported the size of its waste bin: five gallons. But Jim discovered that the Aurora’s jam-free sensor—designed to give you a head’s up with a flashing light when you’re stuffing too much paper into the shredder’s maw—was too sensitive. On a number of occasions while using the Aurora (and feeding it less than 12 sheets), the sensor shut down the shredder mid-shred and then started again, or warned that we were feeding too much paper into it at once. That’s the opposite of a user-friendly feature. We suggest taking a pass. Oh, and it’s not really designed to destroy CDs or other plastic media. So there’s that.

Royal’s $140 RL170MX Cross-Cut Shredder is designed to tackle 17 sheets of paper at a time, but we found it was actually able to handle up to 19 sheets at once before jamming. This is higher-capacity than most of the hardware we looked at, which could make it a tempting purchase for anyone with a lot of paperwork or junk mail to shred on a regular basis. But buyer beware: when Jim tested the volume of its purported 9 gallon bin capacity, he found it was only 7.3 gallons in size. It’s also worth mentioning that while we were able to shred through paperclips, the hardware’s user manual advises against this. So the time you’ll save by being able to destroy more documents at once will be lost thanks to all the time you’ll spend removing staples and paperclips from your paperwork. Lame.

Along with the hardware we requested, Fellowes opted to send along the $323 AutoMax 130 C. It’s an absolute beast of a machine. With it being 20.3” x 13.6” x 21.2” in size and weighing in at just over 40 pounds, you’ll be happy to know that it’s designed to be moved around on a set of built-in wheels. The 130 C comes with a 50-sheet hands-free hopper that lets you load it up with materials to be shredded and then walk away. It also comes with a manual feed slot that can swallow up to 17 sheets at a time. The bad news is that the 130 C costs over $300, and its large footprint is an issue for anyone thinking of using it in a home office. There’s nothing particularly bad we can say about the 130 C, but it’s definitely better suited to use in a professional environment—anything less seems like overkill.

The Fellowes Powershred M-12C Cross-Cut Shredder has the same suggested page capacity as our $50 Amazon pick, and Jim found that a bit of manhandling helped it shred up to 15 sheets at a time. But you can expect the machine’s blades to be hard to clear if you push it like this. It makes three decibels less noise than the AmazonBasics pick. Interestingly, the M-12C’s bin is slightly larger than advertised: 4.2 gallons as opposed to four—a breath of fresh air after seeing so many undersized bins during our research for this guide. Paperclips and staples are no problem, and it comes with a five-year warranty on its blades. Although it’s so similar to the AmazonBasics pick, it’s pretty hard to justify the fact that the M-12C costs $45 more. As such, we have a hard time recommending it. We’re also concerned that the hardware is fairly new to market and hasn’t given users enough time to be able to do any meaningful reporting on its long-term failure or success rates. Perhaps by this time next year, it might prove to be worth the extra $45, but for now, not so much.

The 2014 competition

We also tested a number of shredders for last year’s version of this guide. For the record, we’ve included them here.

The Fellowes Powershred W-11C 11 Sheet Cross-Cut Shredder was well reviewed by Amazon customers, boasting a four-star average (779 five star ratings out of 1590.) We considered it to be a contender for best personal shredder, but it costs $16 more than the AmazonBasics shredder does, was louder and jammed up when Richard attempted to shred a CD with it.

The Aurora AS890C 8-Sheet Cross-Cut Paper/Credit Card Shredder with Basket costs $10 less than the AmazonBasics hardware does, but its basket couldn’t hold as much as the AmazonBasics’ shredder could, and while it was capable of shredding a CD, Richard noted that it struggled to do so. So we had to give it a pass.

As for the office-oriented models, we almost ended up picking the Royal Crosscut Heavy Duty Paper Shredder because it shredded 20 pages at the same time and was easier to unjam, but a lack of information and availability ultimately knocked it out of contention. While the Royal hardware was well reviewed on Amazon, it wasn’t widely reviewed: it received four stars, but was only talked up by four different customers. And despite Royal’s longstanding reputation for producing high quality office hardware, the corporate website is sparse and dated to the point of concern. The shredder was there, but there was next to no information available on it. Their consumer website is marginally better (more early 00’s than late 90’s), but it doesn’t even list the model we tested. We reached out to Royal and were told by a sales rep that the reason the hardware isn’t on the site was because it’s too new (not that that’s excusable in this day and age). Potential support issues aside, the waste bin was inexcusably hard to empty compared to our pick’s easy-out wheeled bin. Ultimately, while the Royal performed some tasks better, the Fellowes’s lack of flaws made it our pick.

The $125 Swingline Stack-and-Shred 60X Hands Free Shredder showed promise because it has a hopper designed to feed letter sized paper into the shredder. But the hopper proved unable to handle oversized paper and is only capable of handling six sheets of paper at a time. For a piece of hardware designed to be used in a small office setting where multiple people might be waiting to use it, such a low feed capacity simply isn’t adequate. What’s more, it failed to shred a CD, so we had to disqualify it from the running.

Why bother with a shredder?

Because having someone steal your personal information can ruin your life.

Frank M. Ahern is the author of How to Disappear and The Digital Hitman: His Weapons for Combating the Digital World. Of late, Frank’s made his living teaching people how to protect their privacy and escape the people in their lives out to make them miserable. But before he set upon his current career path, he made his way by working as a skiptracer. One of the tools of his trade back in the day, was going through his target’s trash to dig up details on their particulars.

In short, Frank used to be an in-the-flesh reason for why you want to shred your documents before taking them to the curb. We asked Frank if he could suggest a few best practises for disposing of documents, and credit cards after they’ve been shredded.

“The reality is,” Frank explained, “you know what happens with shredders? People get them, they use them. The paper fills up, it becomes a pain in the ass and so they don’t always shred. So you’ll see bags of shredded stuff and then a bunch of stuff that’s not shredded.” This mostly defeats the purpose of having a shredder in the first place.

So in order for owning a shredder to pay off, you have to be disciplined. Frank also suggests that in order to avoid shredding fatigue, people consider paying as many of their bills online as possible.

As for the items left over that you can’t take care of online, Frank suggests that you consider staggering the disposal of your shredder waste in order to make it next to impossible for potential identity thieves to plunder your personal information.

“My mother owns a medical billing business,” says Frank. “What she does is she has two shredders. Basically, she’s always ripping things. Half of it goes in one shredder, and the other half goes in the other. That’s one of the things I set her up with: rip it down the middle, get half the account number going in there, and half the account number going in the other shredder. If you’re really concerned about your privacy, you won’t want to be dumping them out at the same time either. You may dump out shredder A on the first of the month, and then shredder B on the 15th of the month. That’s ideal, because if you only get half of the information, what’s the big deal?” You don’t need to own two shredders to put this tip into practice. Instead, simply give your shredder waste a good mixing while it’s still in the shredder’s bin. Then, dispose of one half of the waste in your recycling bin, take it to the curb and then wait a week before disposing of the rest of the other half.

And, of course, you could potentially go a few steps further. Frank admitted that after a lifetime of looting people’s information for fun and profit, he flushes any documents or information that he doesn’t want getting into other people’s hands down the toilet. If you’re worried about your plumbing, he also had another suggestion of what to do with your shredded waste.

“My brother owns a business too, and he’ll throw food garbage in there too,” Frank explains. “It’s not ecological, but you know, if you have someone going through the garbage, you want to make it difficult for them.”

If our planet’s health is as important to you as your information security, you might also consider composting your shredder waste. While you wouldn’t want to include paper with indelible and possibly toxic inks on it in your vegetable garden, using it in your flowerbeds could be an ecological win that simultaneously keeps your information safe.

Care and maintenance

The best way to prevent jams and wear is periodically oiling your shredder. Doing so will prevent blade friction, which helps to keep things moving along. How often you do this depends on how much you depend upon the hardware on a daily basis and what the shredder’s manufacturer suggests either in the device’s operating manual.

Most shredder manufacturers suggest using a dedicated shredder lubricant. If the prices on Amazon are any indication, that can run you anywhere between eight bucks to just under $30, depending how much you want. Another option is to spring for lubricated sheets that are designed to oil up the guts of your shredder as you run them through the hardware.

If all of this sounds too expensive for you, some people say that it’s possible to get the same results by using Canola oil, which most folks have in their kitchens already. And there’s some reason to believe this is true, too: a few years ago, one of Lifehacker’s readers came across the MSDS (Material Safety Data Sheet) for Fellowes’ in-house brand of shredder oil. The ingredients were as follows: Canola oil. As bizarre as that might sound, it’s also what Amazon recommends for the AmazonBasics shredder: “Paper shredders require regular oil lubrication for optimal performance and extended lifespan. We recommend you oil your shredder once a month. Your basic vegetable or cooking oil (nothing flammable or petroleum based) can be drizzled onto a few sheets of paper and fed into the shredder.”

Wrapping it up

There’s no foolproof way to prevent fraud or identity fraud, but it’s worth the effort to make it difficult for criminals to get their hands on your data. After running multiple tests, consulting with experts, and reading up on everything we could find on the topic, we feel confident the $50 AmazonBasics 12-Sheet Cross-Cut Paper/CD/Credit Card Shredder is the best shredder for most people, and the $175 Fellowes 100% Jam Proof Shredder, 73Ci 12-Sheet Cross-Cut shredder is the one for heavier users. If you require a higher level of security for your documents, consider the $100 AmazonBasics 12-Sheet High Security Micro-Cut Paper, CD, and Credit Card Shredder with Pullout Basket, which can reduce paper to bits of insanely difficult-to-reassemble confetti. And for those who need a super-secure shredder with a higher capacity, the $270 Fellowes Powershred 450Ms SafeSense 7-sheet Micro-Cut Shredder is a pricy but worthwhile upgrade.