Tom Ford Face Protect Broad Spectrum SPF 50 is, as its name suggests, a sunblock, but it also moisturizes with kukui seed oil and creates a smooth finish on the skin. The light texture blends easily; the small tube can be stashed in a purse or desk drawer.

Treatments for Parched Nails

“A lot of people’s hands, and especially the cuticles, get so dry in the winter,” said Nina Werman, the owner of Valley, a chain of nail salons in Manhattan. “You have to be pretty regimented about moisturizing in order for that not to happen.” To help, several nail polish brands have created products to treat parched nails at home.

Released this year, Essie Treat Love & Color is a collection of three nail conditioners that leave a light wash of sheer color. They are designed to wear instead of traditional polish, for those who can’t imagine their nails without at least the hint of a manicure.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Of the Moment The lifestyle newsletter from the Styles, Travel and Food sections, offering the latest trends to news you can use. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

OPI has introduced a treatment line, Gel Break. At its core is a vitamin-infused serum you apply instead of a base coat, with three polishes and a topcoat that also contains conditioning ingredients.

Sally Hansen Moisture Rehab is also a serum, to be swiped over polish-free nails at bedtime. Its liquid formula includes algae and açai extract to help hydrate nails and cuticles.

Nails Inc has added Back to Life Recovery Treatment & Base to its line, to wear alone or as a base coat. The formula includes hydrating oils of apricot, avocado and coconut.

Lip Colors That Last

For lips, there are new tubes of highly pigmented colors that are less dehydrating than earlier products. “They are making them much, much better so they don’t dry your lips as much,” Ms. Saxby said. “It’s also appealing that they don’t slide. They go on, dry on and stay on.” Most have a wand applicator that makes precise application easy even without lip liner.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Burberry Liquid Lip Velvet exemplifies the category. Although its softly matte colors last all day, lips don’t feel parched or weighted down. It is available in neutral colors and pronounced shades like Oxblood and Military Red.

The new L’Oréal Paris Infallible Paints Lipcolor comes in a small plastic tube filled with intensely pigmented color that promises to be waterproof. Although a bit thick when first applied, it dries down to an opaque cream that doesn’t feel heavy.

Make Up For Ever Artist Acrylip Lip Paint comes in a tube you might expect to find in an artists’ supply store. The sponge-tip applicator makes it a bit tricky to get precise coverage near the corners of your mouth, but the product’s finish — an easy-to-wear, creamy stain — is forgiving.

Tarteist Quick Dry Matte Lip Paint from Tarte is a new take on a product introduced a couple years ago; its 20 shades, with names like Bling and Wannabe, promise not to parch the lips despite being deeply saturated with color.

This winter, Giorgio Armani added six colors to its Lip Maestro Notorious line; most are quite bold, like Spotlight, a shade of flamingo that brings Palm Beach to mind. Several other pinks are available, as well as bright orange and red.