Cooking meals at home in a Crock-Pot or slow cooker can save time, money, and tremendous effort. However, many of the slow cooking recipes you'll find on the web are for dense comfort foods.

So if you're watching your weight or just like to eat clean, there are a number of recipes you can stick in the pot for healthy eating — here are eight of my all-time favorites to get you started. (See also: 35 Slow Cooker Recipes for Busy Vegetarians)

1. Sweet Potato Bake

This black bean sweet potato bake is simple and flavorful. You'll first heat some oil in a skillet and sauté your onions, garlic, and spices before tossing the rest of the ingredients (beans, potatoes, broth, etc.) into the Crock-Pot for four to six hours. Serve with brown rice, kamut, or quinoa on the side.

2. Rotisserie Chicken

My mom loves cooking chicken in her slow cooker, so she passed along this rosemary rotisserie chicken recipe. You'll mix together garlic powder and fresh rosemary before rubbing it — and some lemon slices — all over the bird. Then, cook for eight hours on low until your chicken reaches an internal temperature of 180 degrees Fahrenheit.

3. Paleo "Oatmeal"

I recently tried this Paleo "n'oatmeal" recipe for a family make-ahead breakfast, and I was blown away. The texture is extremely reminiscent of oatmeal, but it's actually a protein-packed mix of walnuts, almonds, butternut squash, apples, cinnamon, nutmeg, coconut sugar, and coconut milk. Lots of nutritive stuff to keep you going all morning long.

4. Kale Soup

A friend made us this white bean and kale soup a while back when we moved into our new house. Vegetarians and vegans can substitute vegetable broth for the chicken broth. And if you don't have white beans, use kidney or black. Don't have quinoa? Use brown rice or some other healthy grain. Feel free to customize this recipe so it works with the ingredients in your cupboard.

5. Applesauce

Store bought applesauce contains added sugars and other ingredients to make it shelf-stable. So, I started making my own homemade applesauce each fall with local apples. I also freeze it in large quantities. Just pour warm applesauce into freezer containers, leave an inch or so for expansion, and let cool completely before transferring to your freezer for six months to a year. It also makes a great dessert if you're steering clear of sweets.

6. Poached Salmon

Need a boost of omega fatty acids? Try this poached salmon recipe in your Crock-Pot. The best part is that you don't have to worry as much about over-cooking or drying out the fish. Combine water, wine, lemon, shallots, bay leaf, herbs, peppercorns and salt in the cooker on high for 30 minutes. Then place seasoned salmon in the pot skin-side down and cook for 45 minutes to an hour.

7. Split Pea Soup

One of the most popular recipes on my blog is this split pea miso soup. And making it couldn't be easier. Chop your onion, carrots, and garlic, and toss into the pot. Then add in coconut oil and miso paste, and mix until everything is well coated. Pour in the liquid and cook for four to six hours on high, until the split peas get perfectly mushy.

8. Mushroom Risotto

This mushroom barley risotto recipe is creamy and sensible — each hearty serving is around just 435 calories. After sautéing the onions and mushrooms, you'll add the barley and cook until lightly browned. Then toss everything in the slow cooker and cook until barley is tender (around three hours).

What healthy recipes have you made in your slow cooker?