Everyone loves an A-lister, right? Except the charity minions who have to find them the right kind of hat and air-conditioning and cold Diet Coke

At some point, every aid worker involved in a celeb visit has wondered the same thing: how on earth is this my life? How is it that I, a highly experienced humanitarian with an important job to do in an actual emergency, am now trying to source an appropriately cut agency T-shirt for a famously curvaceous actress, having emailed her management to ask her cup size? How did I end up spending hours tracking down European bottled mineral water for a British soap actress for every stage of her African tour?

Secret aid worker: it's one standard for local staff and another for expats Read more

The fuss involved in high-level visits is off the charts. For one American VIP’s 12- hour visit to Aceh, hours were spent locating a hat with a UN-only logo. When we found one somewhere in a cupboard in Jakarta, a triumphant message went to New York – only for his people to turn it down, saying it was a floppy cricket hat “and he only wears baseball caps”). We built a helipad so he could visit a particular transitional shelter site, and told the community that it was a volleyball court. Then there was figuring out how to meet his requirement for cold diet Coke (the solution turned out to be the UN “borrowing” my precious thirtieth-birthday-present ice box).

After investing weeks in prepping for such visits – usually involving staff with actual emergencies to respond to – we then have to manage the celeb in question. Pity the poor staffer in charge of the British TV actor who, when offered an overnight stay in a refugee camp in South Sudan to bond with war survivors, rather exceeded his brief by getting drunk with and seducing one of the local women. Or the hapless NGO press manager when an up-and-coming actress treated a room full of tsunami survivors to a re-enactment of her most famous role. “It wouldn’t have been so bad, if it hadn’t involved drowning,” he says. One UN press officer still shudders when she recalls the Asian actress invited, with great fanfare, to speak on her agency’s behalf at a water and sustainability conference in Tokyo. “She walked up to the podium, and started reading her own poetry,” she remembers. “No mention of us, or water, or anything. Just … poems. Thank God no media were there and my boss was in New York.”

Do gooder done bad: top five celebrity blunders Read more

Even if you’re not actually in charge of them, celebrities are somehow around. Whether it’s John Travolta flying a plane-load of scientologists into Port au Prince or the refugees in Zataari camp in Jordan failing to recognise Orlando Bloom, they are part of the landscape, to the point where it becomes faintly surreal. “I was working in South Sudan when Matt Dillon turned up at my agency’s hut,” remembers a friend. “I completely didn’t recognise him. ‘Hi,’ he said. ‘I’m Matt.’ ‘Oh that’s funny,’ I replied, ‘I heard there might be some famous actor coming today who’s also called Matt’.”



In Haiti, in the UN base where most of the first responders lived, one agency outraged the entire base by taking over the only air conditioned tent – in which some slept due to the sauna-like conditions in the accommodation area – to host a cocktail reception for Christina Aguilera. I vividly remember a colleague, in boxers and a T shirt, arguing vociferously with her bouncers, who told him that not only was he not allowed in, but he was inappropriately dressed for the local culture. The irony of telling off someone for not wearing enough clothes when your day job is guarding a woman whose career was largely built on not wearing enough clothes was apparently lost on them.



No one has ever done a bang-for-buck analysis of the amount donated by readers of Grazia vs the hoopla involved

Some celebrities, by contrast, are only too happy to mingle. “I remember a night in a South Sudanese dive bar with a visiting internationally fancied film star,” recalls one female friend. “He was blind drunk and when we went over to talk to him he started lecturing me about not knowing about South Sudan. ‘I mean, no offence, but how long have you actually been here?’ he asked. I said, ‘Over three years now.’ Him: (while creepily stroking my arm) ‘I really love aid workers’.”

Recently, some celebrities have upped the ante by actually getting involved in the work. Again in Haiti, one film star turned camp manager was initially known for turning up at UN meetings and yelling at those present that if they didn’t do what he said he’d name them personally on CNN as holding up the relief effort. (What’s that, Karma police? Oh, OK. It was Sean Penn). Later on, as we became colleagues and vaguely friends, he would call me up and pretend to be various strange people. I always fell for it and my protests that it really wasn’t fair – he’d won two Oscars and I was usually hallucinating with exhaustion – generally fell on deaf ears.

Secret aid worker: flaky aid boys and other development love-life disasters Read more

Sean Penn did at least calm down – and learn his trade. Over the subsequent months he and the work of his organisation J/P HRO (Haitian Relief Organisation) earned at first grudging and then genuine respect. And he’s not the only aid ambassador who has done his homework. A smitten former UNHCR-er remembers working with Angelina Jolie with misty eyes. “She knew more about refugees, and had been to more places than I had,” he sighs. “She had her own cameraman, so all I had to do was find the locations and the refugees.” Another long-standing project manager said: “I was impressed with her in Haiti, in Jordan and in Sri Lanka. She left experts speechless every time.”

I wish more were like her. Or like the English football star whose only request on a gruelling trip to Sierra Leone with a packed schedule and very basic accommodation was that he could have the evening to kick a ball about with some local kids. (Yes, it was David Beckham.) Or that agencies could use celebrities who actually mean something to the people they are visiting (the excitement in Haiti when Lionel Messi came to town was genuinely moving). Or get celebs who are actually willing to do stuff – like Diana walking through that minefield – rather than just smile for the camera.

Look, I get why aid agencies bring celebs and high-level politicians to disasters. Or at least I think I do – although as far as I know no one has ever done an actual bang-for-buck analysis of the amount donated by readers of Grazia vs the hoopla involved.

And I’m actually of the view that everyone should see a disaster. Come. Bear witness. Listen, and learn. Seek to understand why these things are a blight and a challenge to the entire world. How they can inspire and transform as well as destroy. It’s the only way anyone can begin to understand what it really means to call yourself a humanitarian.

Secret Aid Worker: After years in the field, I've lost my compassion Read more

Done well, field visits light the touchpaper of amazing advocacy and bring understanding and attention to forgotten worlds. But celebs: put down your soy latte and your possible-Cannes-material script, and try to think beyond tales at your next dinner party. Understand just how much effort – most of it diverted from the actual response – goes into making your trip possible. Aid agencies: try picking stars who are willing to leave the airport and be educated, and – even better – those that mean something to the poor people paraded in front of them, not just to the reality- TV-consuming masses whose pockets you are targeting. Stop using suffering people as photo ops and props for your beaming celeb.

And next time, give me back my ice box.

Do you have a secret aid worker story you’d like to tell? You can contact us confidentially at globaldevpros@theguardian.com - please put Secret Aid Worker in the subject line.

Join our community of development professionals and humanitarians. Follow@GuardianGDP on Twitter.