For doctors specializing in the nipping and tucking of faces, the latest stats on plastic surgery might be a bit of a bummer.

While sagging cheeks are still a leading motivation for cosmetic surgery, new data (PDF) compiled by the American Society of Plastic Surgeons (ASPS) suggests a subtle tweak in the trends. In 2015, redesigning the derriere—not the face—was the fastest growing area of plastic surgery in the United States, the society found.

Specifically, butt implants and lifts showed the largest uptick in procedures over those done in 2014—both increasing by 36 percent. Backside bulking with fat grafts also rose by 28 percent. And surgeons were clearly working their tails off, performing more than 22,000 tushie operations—about one every 30 minutes over the year.

“While more traditional facial procedures and breast augmentations are still among the most popular, we’re seeing much more diversity in the areas of the body patients are choosing to address,” ASPS President David H. Song said in a statement. The society also noted increases in lower body lifts and upper arm lifts.

But that isn’t the bottom of revelations from the report; the data also suggests a rising trend in breast reductions in men. From 2014 and 2015, surgeries to shrink male breasts perked up by five percent. That brings men’s share of all breast reduction surgeries to more than 40 percent, the ASPS noted.

“As plastic surgery is becoming more common and accepted in men, we’re seeing more of them undergo procedures to tighten and tone problem areas, like the breasts,” Song said. “This procedure is often done in younger men who face genetic challenges with the size and shape of their breasts, and when appropriate, surgery can make a big difference in their lives.”

While the posterior procedures and male contributions were up-and-comers in 2015, the top five most common operations of the 1.7 million cosmetic surgeries performed last year were less surprising. They were, in order, breast augmentation, liposuction, nose reshaping, eyelid surgery, and tummy tucks. But for the first time since at least 2000, facelifts didn’t make the cut.