The new law, if passed, could jeopardize these gains, conservationists and some legal experts say.

One draft clause could legalize animal performances if a provincial-level government granted a permit. Another clause in the bill says the use of wild animals as medicine, supplements or food must be “in conformity with the country’s related laws and regulations on Chinese traditional medicine, supplements and food,” without specifying which related laws, whether those dealing with consumer safety or those dealing with the sources of ingredients.

“A major step backward and a disaster for conservation,” said An Xiang, the director of Dexiang Law Firm in Beijing, who has campaigned for animal welfare legislation. He said he viewed the medicine and food clause as a green light for activities like bear bile farming and eating tigers and pangolins.

Photo

“If the current law is vague and stops shy of allowing the commercial use of animals,” Mr. An said, “the new law is brazenly detailed about it, telling you how these animals may be used and where to go to get a permit.”

Mr. Zhang, who said his Ta Foundation was involved in drafting the bill, agreed that commercial interests overtook the final proposal. He said that the foundation had collaborated with the State Council’s Development Research Center, a government think tank, to organize seminars in which lawmakers met with environmentalists, legal law professionals, government officials and business representatives.

Five such meetings were held last year, Mr. Zhang said. “Every time, we were presented a draft containing inputs from the previous discussion. The officials were open-minded, and everybody got a fair hearing,” he said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“But then at the last meeting in September, we saw the reverse. The views of businesses were strengthened, while those of the conservationists were reduced.”

The version posted on Jan. 1 largely reflects the situation in September, he said.

Some, while critical of the new law, take a less dire view.

Zhou Ke, a law professor at Renmin University in Beijing who provided the government with legal opinions during the drafting of the bill, said that the clause addressing animal parts used in food and medicine would not affect China’s commitment to the protection of endangered species as required by its own regulations and international treaties like the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. But he agreed that some of the wording in the draft “makes it sound like eating wild animals is now encouraged when it should be discouraged.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Supporters of the bill, including government agencies that manage wildlife, have defended using wild animals as natural resources. In an interview in The Paper last month, a news site based in Shanghai, Yan Xun, a wildlife conservation official at the State Forestry Administration of China, called the approach a necessity for the economy in “some places.” He did not cite examples.

“The law was not made just for animal protection groups,” Mr. Yan was quoted as saying.

Shifting licensing authority from the central government to provincial governments will allow regulators to focus on their main tasks, he added. “We will have more time to supervise and make rules,” he told The Paper.

“In the past, we spent most of our time issuing licenses.”