Photo

Calling Peter Voulkos a ceramist is a bit like calling Jimi Hendrix a guitarist. The charismatic, rebellious sculptor and teacher was a genuine rock star of his medium, a trained potter who went on to violate every rule of pot-making — often before a live audience. His sculptures started out clearly enough as polite, wheel-thrown vessels but evolved into nervy and transgressive abstract paintings, looming behemoths fired in industrial-size kilns, precarious assemblages and live-wire performances (no ritual immolation but lots of smashing and dropping of plates and vases).

“Voulkos: The Breakthrough Years,” a taut, electric exhibition at the Museum of Arts and Design, shows us just how quickly and deftly Voulkos (1924-2002) reinvented ceramic art. It zooms in on 1953 to 1968, a pivotal decade and a half in American painting and sculpture — not just in New York but, as is less often recognized, on the West Coast, where Voulkos worked and taught (first at the Los Angeles County Art Institute, now known as the Otis College of Art and Design, and then at the University of California, Berkeley). There, he developed a kind of “Abstract Expressionist ceramics,” embraced by critics in both Artforum and Craft Horizons, and influenced outstanding painter-ceramists including Ken Price and Ron Nagle.

First, though, he was a student himself — one who respectfully mastered throwing, glazing and clay processing at college in Montana, and produced award-winning functional pottery. A display of conventionally shaped vessels from the mid-1950s shows tentative experiments with surface, including wax-resist processes borrowed from the textile arts and a “slip stencil” effect produced with liquid clay and paper cutouts. Also visible are some cross-cultural currents. (Voulkos admired the Japanese folk-craft movement known as mingei, with its emphasis on asymmetry and chance effects.)

Photo

By 1956, however, he was settled in Los Angeles and making decidedly nonfunctional “pot assemblages.” With the devilish “Rocking Pot” of that year, an upside-down bowl riddled with holes and affixed to skids, he flouted the idea that a well-made piece of ceramic art should be a stable, leakproof container. A fellow ceramics teacher in Southern California coined the phrase “lift and life” to describe the qualities of an ideal pot; Voulkos responded with his own mantra, “dump and death.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

His next “breakthrough” would require some technical innovation: a factory-size kiln, an industrial dough mixer and the kind of warehouse-size humidifiers used to keep fruit moist, as well as some tweaking of the clay recipe to enable monumental forms. Sharing a studio with the artist John Mason, Voulkos fired up his new equipment and made ever bigger and wilder ceramics: craggy, hulking creations like “Little Big Horn” and “Sitting Bull,” which look monolithic but are actually composed of multiple wheel-thrown forms and clay slabs fitted together.