Photo

A friend of mine inherited a ­Bavarian coffee set from her maternal great-­grandmother, a woman who fled Europe in the late 1930s, carrying little more than the purpose-built, velvet-lined case that still holds it. That family is scattered across the globe and the way of life the coffee set embodied has vanished, but the dainty china pot and matching cups remain flawless. Porcelain is like that. We all know that the sweep of a careless elbow can shatter it into unmendable bits. But take some basic precautions and in a hundred years it will look as good as new — its colors undimmed, its whites snowy — after you and your children are dead and gone. It is fragile, and it is strong.

Invented in China, about 1,000 years ago, porcelain is a ceramic made from a varying mixture of materials, the most indispensable of which is a whitish clay, kaolin. The city of Jingdezhen produced the most beautiful of these objects: bowls, jars, vases and other items created in vast quantities for the imperial court. Porcelain was so abundant in China that when Marco Polo made the first mention of the material in Western literature, it was to marvel that the pieces he encountered in China were “so plentiful and cheap that for a Venetian groat you might buy three bowls of such beauty that nothing lovelier could be imagined.”

Not so in Europe, where, for 400 years after they laid eyes on it, no one knew how to make the stuff. Aristocrats and monarchs regarded imported “china” as treasure. It was nicknamed “white gold.” Augustus II, elector of Saxony, an omnivorous collector of both mistresses and china, wrote, “The same is true for oranges as for porcelain, that once one has the sickness of one or the other, one can never get enough of the things and wishes to have more and more.” In the early 18th century, under his orders, an odd couple of proto-scientists — an urbane mathematician and a young, eccentric alchemist — finally figured out how to make porcelain in Dresden. A few years later, William Cookworthy, a mild-mannered Quaker apothecary living in Devon, noticed that the clay in a nearby Cornish hill resembled the kaolin described in newly published letters from China. He became the first person to make true porcelain in England.

This is the rough origin story Edmund de Waal sets out to tell in “The White Road: Journey Into an Obsession.” He would appear to be the ideal candidate for the job: A celebrated ceramist who makes austere white porcelain vessels, he is also the author of a surprise best seller: “The Hare With Amber Eyes,” published in 2010. That book followed the fate of a collection of netsuke (small Japanese carvings) acquired by his fabulously wealthy Jewish family during the belle epoque, lost when they fled Austria following the Anschluss and then recovered again when a former servant revealed that she had stealthily secreted the little objects in her mattress.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Book Review Newsletter Sign up to receive a preview of each Sunday’s Book Review, delivered to your inbox every Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

What makes “The Hare With Amber Eyes” so entrancing is not the netsuke, however charming they may be, but the family, beginning with the suave cousin of his great-grandfather, one of the models for Proust’s Charles Swann and an early enthusiast and collector of Japanese art and a patron of the Impressionists. De Waal has a wicked gift for dissecting the tricky relations between artists and the rich people whose whims make it possible for them to both work and eat. He applies it to delicious effect in the strongest section of “The White Road,” which describes the travails of Ehrenfried Walther von Tschirnhaus — student of Spinoza, friend of Newton and Leibniz — as he rattled around Europe seeking an aristocrat to fund his research: “If you are interested in optics or mineralogy or funding a dictionary of philosophy, you are lucky to get two minutes of the attention of a margrave who lives for killing stags or boar in inventive ways.”