Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

MONTH OF September

MONTHLY OVERVIEW:

Summer ain’t over till it’s over—and you’re not ready to bid adieu to its ravishing rays just yet. Why should you go quietly into those chillier nights, Taurus? The Sun is lingering in Virgo and your festive, fun-loving fifth house until September 22, putting you in celebratory spirits. Blood-pumping Mars is also in Virgo from September 5 until October 22, prompting you to act boldly on your urges and desires. With your hedonistic tendencies dialed up by the red planet’s presence, you’re still in the mood for music festivals, sampling street food and squeezing in one last vacation. Forget sweater weather—slip into something sleek and glamorous. Then go hold court at your favorite watering hole or throw a little welcome-back fiesta for the friends you haven’t seen in a couple months.

Think twice before offering Chateau Taurus as your gathering spot, though. Mercury, planet of communication, travel and technology, is wrapping up a tricky retrograde (http://astrostyle.com/mercury-retrograde/) spanning August 12 to September 5. Mercury spent the bulk of its backspin in Virgo and your fifth house of self-expression, pressing the mute button on your joie de vivre. An ex may have resurfaced or old drama might have flared, quickly escalating into a heated argument. On August 31, Mercury backed into Leo and your domestic fourth house, bringing the tension closer to home…or maybe right into the heart of yours. Friction with a female relative or roommate could reach a boiling point during the first week of the month. If you’re moving or dealing with a home repair, brace yourself for extra chaos—or just wait a few days. An appliance could go on the fritz. (Time to get a new ionic hair dryer or high-efficiency washing machine?) Take extra precautions with electronics, plugging them into surge protectors rather than directly into the wall.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

An ideal day to bring everyone together arrives on September 6, when the convivial Pisces full moon illuminates your eleventh house of groups, teamwork and technology. A collaboration you’ve been working on since the February 26 Pisces new moon (which also happened to be a potent solar eclipse) could reach a big turning point. You might have a shared victory lap to take, or you could officially join forces with some savvy innovators. Is it time to part ways or distance yourself from a troubled tribe? If so, this full moon helps you make your exit and move on to a better fit. Planning a grand online debut? An email or social media campaign could go viral. Although you’ll want to take any lingering Mercury retrograde precautions (proofread and test, please!) before hitting “post” or “send,” this full moon still offers a fortuitous launch date.

Another day in the spotlight arrives at the September 20 new moon, which kicks off a fresh six-month cycle in your fifth house of passion, creativity and self-expression. Who cares if Fashion Week just passed? Under this bold lunation, you could be a walking “September issue” or street style star just by doing you. If you want to debut a new look or hairstyle, the cosmos line up to assist. Make sure you’re courting the right attention, though. An exact quincunx (www.astrostyle.com/aspects/quincunx) (an awkward 150-degree angle) with rebellious Uranus could attract shady people and incite questionable behavior. A hedonistic urge—from drinking too much at a party and hooking up to getting a poorly planned tattoo—might have longer-lasting effects than you bargained for. Stay mindful in your pursuit of pleasure.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

The time-out whistle blows on September 22, when the Sun starts a monthlong trek through Libra and your sixth house of health, fitness and organization. Break from the dramatic plotlines and get life back into a simpler, steady groove. Have you fallen off the wellness wagon this summer? Chilled chardonnay at your favorite sidewalk bistro and carb-laden dinners have been fun, but you’ll soon start craving seasonal produce and savasanas. Since the sixth house rules digestion, read up on eating for gut health (https://www.mindbodygreen.com/tag/gut-health) and consider adding a probiotic to your daily regimen. With lucky Jupiter wrapping up a 13-month tour of Libra on October 10, you’ve got an extra push to get a healthy lifestyle change underway or activate your fall fitness plans.

Stress could reach peak levels on September 28, when expansive Jupiter makes its third and final opposition (www.astrostyle.com/aspects/opposite) to unpredictable Uranus in your twelfth house of closure, healing and rest. Have you become so consumed with “doing” that you’ve lost touch with the divine? Maybe you’ve made one too many sacrifices, leaving yourself saddled with an unsustainable workload. Before resentment pushes you over the brink, wave the white flag. Delegate, swallow your pride, ask for support. Like a plodding bull, your sign has a tendency to just keep pushing through adversity. But sometimes the best course of action is to pause and wait for the universe to send you a clearer signal. When you force things, you could miss important guidance or wind up working harder not smarter. During a Jupiter-Uranus face-off, which only occurs every 14 years, there’s a tendency to be extreme: cutting people off or acting in a dictatorial manner. Look back to the previous two Jupiter-Uranus oppositions in this cycle, which fell on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Themes from around those dates could crop up again.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

With these two rash planets in your health houses, your body is talking to you—and you’d be wise to listen. It could be time to make a serious lifestyle change, like cleaning up your diet, quitting cigarettes or starting a consistent yoga and meditation practice. This rare aspect may be sounding the call to stop self-medicating or avoiding important issues. Denial is no longer an acceptable co-pilot. Don’t dismiss those aches and pains: They could be a wake-up call to pay attention to an emotional or spiritual imbalance. Is a lower back twinge a sign that you’re feeling unsupported? Are your intense dreams and fitful sleep sending subconscious messages? Look deeper and, if you’re feeling out of sorts, see a doctor. Even if it’s minor, it’s always better to be safe. (Check out our favorite books on mind-body-spirit health here http://astore.amazon.com/astrostyle-20?_encoding=UTF8&node=7.)

Luckily, you’ll get a dose of perspective and shored-up conviction that same day. Also on September 28, transformational Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your ninth house of philosophy, growth and risk-taking. If you DO need to make a change—whether big or small—powerful Pluto’s course correction will steer the way. Follow your intuition, which may have been dimmed by the dwarf planet’s backspin, and open your mind to new possibilities. Instead of taking a skeptical “I’ll believe it when I see it” stance, dare to trust that things WILL work out for you, even if you’re not quite sure how. As Martin Luther King, Jr., said, “Faith is taking the first step even when you don’t see the whole staircase.”

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

LOVE & ROMANCE:

Get cozy with a cutie or head out on the prowl? You’re in the mood for a little of both this month, as the love planets lure you out to play and tempt you to stay in at the same time. On the “innocent” side is romantic Venus, which is in Leo until September 19 and warming up your fourth house of home, family and nostalgia. You might talk babies…or just baby-talk, making up cutesie nicknames with your S.O. and getting sweetly affectionate. You’re feeling sensitive and sentimental, in the mood to play house, exchange keys or binge-watch new episodes of your favorite show while cuddling on the couch.

But don’t get too comfortable in that fall fleece just yet, Taurus. Before you start unapologetically Instagramming your “pumpkin spice latte with bae” moments, lusty Mars roars in, reminding you that it’s taken up residence in Virgo and your fiery-loined fifth house. Mars only visits here every couple years, giving you major sex appeal. This year, it’s in Virgo until October 22. Don’t be surprised if you seduce a slew of sultry fans without even trying.

Venus will join the red planet in Virgo from September 19 to October 14, turning the rest of the month into a heat zone. Couples should dress up and enjoy decadent times together, cranking up the sexy chemistry. Single? Boldly approach someone you’re attracted to or just be your full-on uncensored self. You’ll turn heads and attract admirers, whether for a short-term romantic adventure or something more lasting. With the love planets putting you in a “live for the moment” mindset, you’ll be most concerned with enjoying every MINUTE to the max.

Opportunity Days:

September 2: Mars-Uranus trine

Assertive Mars and impulsive Uranus loosen your tongue, and you can’t help but blurt out how you feel. Tears or strong feelings might take you (and your love interest) by surprise. Although this may shake up the status quo, it can also inspire more emotional honesty for the long haul. An unexpected pregnancy or key exchange is also possible today.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 9: Sun-Pluto trine

You’ve been keeping something to yourself for a while, perhaps fearing it would be seen as taboo or a disruption to your relationship. Today’s open-hearted (and open-minded) Sun-Pluto trine could help you consider new options in the boudoir or a different avenue for meeting people. Give it a chance!

September 10-30: Mercury in Virgo

Chatty Mercury enters your passionate fifth house, emboldening you to express your interest and desires.

September 12: Venus-Saturn trine

Sorry to break it to you, but sometimes love DOES mean having to say you’re sorry. Today is one of those days. Ready to kiss and makeup? Own your part and hug it out, Taurus. A pregnancy, engagement or cohabitation could be in order. You may decide to meet each other’s families or merge your lives in a meaningful way.

September 18: Venus-Uranus trine

A sudden emotional awakening opens you up emotionally and spiritually. Is it time to meet each other’s families or give someone an extra set of house keys?

September 20: Virgo new moon

A fresh six-month cycle begins for romance today. Set intentions for what you want to manifest, whether it’s more affection, better communication or more satisfaction behind closed doors. Since this new moon is lighting up your self-expression sector, you might take a risk and reveal your feelings or come out and ask for what you want.

Challenge Days:

September 5: Sun-Neptune opposition

Your heart is telling you one thing, but your head is saying another. A new love interest may not mesh well with your social circle, or friends could give conflicting feedback. Listen to your heart, but take any recurring “warnings” into consideration. For longtime couples, it might be time to stop sharing all your romantic ups and downs with friends or on social media. Keep a few things reserved for just the two of you.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 13: Sun-Saturn square

The bold Sun in your romance house locks horns with restrictive Saturn. Boundary alert! Someone could cross the line of your comfort zone. You may also worry that a romance isn’t going to lead to the real thing. But is it too soon to push for a commitment? Slow down a little instead of trying to move things ahead too quickly. That said, don’t let fear stop you from taking a necessary risk.

September 24: Mars-Neptune opposition

Obsessive Mars in your passion zone could turn up the heat in a romance or make you all fired up and reactive. Take a step back and look at this objectively. Hazy Neptune is no help with that, however. Be careful about asking your friends what they think: You’ll get confusing and conflicting opinions.

MONEY & CAREER:

Boldness is your M.O. for the first three weeks of the month, and you’re not afraid to take a stand or even make a bit of a scene. Dare to speak up and creatively challenge your colleagues, especially if a project has lapsed into an uninspired groove. With the Sun blazing through Virgo and your expressive fifth house until September 22, you can bring back the magic and reignite the spark of inspiration.

Communicator Mercury is also in Virgo from September 10 to 30, and motivator Mars is burning through this same head-turning zone until October 22, giving you charisma and confidence in spades. Since fame could come your way, make sure you court the right kind of attention. Save the PR stunts and instead draw crowds for your positive and uplifting accomplishments. But with Mercury and feisty Mars alongside the Sun in this passion-driven zone of your chart, watch for drama even as you enjoy your time in the spotlight. All eyes are on YOU, Taurus, and if you’ve been waiting for the right moment to strike, these showstopper skies are it.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Whether you’re gainfully employed or looking for a new gig, you’ll be feeling more creative during this solar spell. Channel the muse and get the juices flowing—you never know when inspiration for your next big idea will strike. On September 20, the year’s only new moon in Virgo opens a potent portal. You could see your name in lights or receive recognition and accolades in the coming six months. Pick a project that will really let you shine.

Once the Sun shifts into Libra and your efficient sixth house on September 22, it’s time to get down to brass tacks. Take a bow and get busy with behind-the-scenes tasks instead of courting the spotlight. Thwart any sense of overwhelm by streamlining and systematizing. Healthy eating, stretch breaks and exercise will boost productivity. Heed the expression “sitting is the new smoking.” If you have a sedentary job, look into standing desks or get up and move around at least once an hour. Here are a few great tips. (https://www.mindbodygreen.com/0-16806/5-ways-to-beat-your-desk-sentence.html).

On September 28, powermonger Pluto turns direct in your expansive ninth house after a five-month retrograde, encouraging you to roll the dice and take a risk. Look before you leap, however, because that same day, a face-off between no-limits Jupiter and unpredictable Uranus could shake up some of your carefully laid plans. Don’t give up or scrap the whole idea because you get thrown a curveball. Recalibrate the details and map out your vision so you can turn a so-called setback into something even better than you originally intended.

Opportunity Days:

September 6: Pisces full moon

The full moon in your teamwork and technology house could bring a group endeavor to a victorious moment. Say yes to a promising collaboration. It’s a great day for a digital launch or to publish a viral post. Seek out synergies through your current networks; ask friends and colleagues to make introductions.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 9: Sun-Pluto trine

Dare to go there! You could be recognized for your visionary ideas, creative talents or bold opinions.

September 28: Pluto retrograde ends

Transformational Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your risk-taking ninth house. If your faith and motivation were shaken, you’ll regain your optimism. Stalled plans could resume speed, especially with an entrepreneurial venture or a return to school. Dust yourself off and try again!

September 30-October 17: Mercury in Libra

Mental Mercury in your orderly sixth house sharpens your analytical thinking. This is a great time to plan, train employees, delegate and bring more efficiency into your life.

Challenge Days:

September 28: Jupiter-Uranus opposition

Should you try to steer this ship or just let go of the wheel? Today’s wild-swinging face-off of hotheaded Uranus and boundless Jupiter could skew your judgment. You might work yourself into such a stressed-out state that you want to just quit or say “screw it!” While you should definitely stop being a martyr or taking on too much, don’t throw out the baby with the bathwater. You may end up sabotaging yourself and undoing all the hard work that’s been completed so far.

Love Days: 20, 23

Money Days: 12, 2

Luck Days: 10, 28

Off Days: 8, 21, 26

See All Signs