Relationships are the main theme this month, as the Sun, buoyed by other planetary players, makes its way through the most committed regions of your chart. El Sol will visit your opposite sign of Virgo until September 22, helping you balance the give-and-take in all of your closest connections. Whether you're negotiating a contract, figuring out how to let a friendship evolve or investing your heart in a romantic situation, honest and open dialogue is the key.

Pisces rules the imagination, and you often escape into the safe zone of your flowing thoughts and feelings. Swim out into the open waters now, Fish. Let others contribute to your world as equal partners and players. With energizing Mars riding shotgun in Virgo from September 5 to October 22, your bonds get a major booster shot. Negotiations can move swiftly, and they might get heated—but the fast pace could also be exciting. Romantic chemistry can also morph into happily-ever-after a lot sooner than you imagined. For couples, this is an exciting time to try new adventures that push past the same old same old.

Warning: Impatient Mars can spark an argumentative streak, and you could find yourself bickering more than usual. Choose your battles: Are you fighting because you're irritated or because you actually have a point? With assertive Mars here, you won't be pushed around or cast as the passive Pisces in this narrative. Be direct and fight back if someone tries to trample on your rights. Keep your focus on resolving the conflict and creating a diplomatic compromise for all.

Brokering peace has been tricky this summer, thanks to communication planet Mercury being retrograde from August 12 to September 5. Mercury was backing through Virgo and your relationship house until August 31, which may have left you a bit shell-shocked. You've withstood quarrels and misunderstandings, both online and with the people you're around most. There are no safe harbors there, Pisces. An ex or a former rival may have resurfaced, or maybe you weren't in the mood for heavy one-on-ones. This month is a whole 'nother story, as the stars revive your appetite for good company and collaboration.

From August 31 to September 5, Mercury will finish its backspin in Leo and your sixth house of health and organization. This wonky grand finale could make you feel disorganized and stressed as you shift into "back to school" mode. It could be hard to stay on top of details, and you’re sure to find errors everywhere you look. Messes you've been ignoring could irk you to distraction now. Use this time to clean, purge, declutter and sort through any summer pileups. But hold off on launching any fall fitness plans or scheduling appointments until Mercury corrects course, when communication and technology are back on your side.

You'll get a lovely parting gift the day after Mercury straightens out. On September 6, the year's only Pisces full moon illuminates your first house of self and personal passions. The spotlight is on you at this annual lunar event, which prompts you to take bold action. You might radically revamp your appearance or adopt a confident new attitude. Maybe you'll finally share your talents with the greater public instead of hiding them.

This is the culmination of the February 26 Pisces new moon, which was also the final solar eclipse in a two-year series. Since 2015, those eclipses in your sign transformed your personal identity and closest relationships in huge ways. The February eclipse was the last push into these autonomous new waters. Now you can reap the rewards of your gutsiest moves—which haven't been easy. You might feel a bit of the angst and triumph that fellow Pisces Kesha pours into her song "Praying" , especially if you had to reinvent some part of your life from the bottom up.

This affirming full moon reminds you what you hold dearest—and not to compromise that! It's a lesson you can lean on at the September 20 Virgo new moon, which kicks off a fresh six-month chapter in your relationship house. You could explore a business partnership or start getting serious with a romantic plus-one. But before you make anything official, ground yourself. This new moon will form an awkward quincunx with unpredictable Uranus in your second house of work, money and daily routines. Chaos in your schedule or financial fluctuations could interrupt the smooth sailing of your relationships. Make sure you hammer out all the practical details of your life before you approach the negotiating table.

There will be plenty more strategy sessions starting September 22, when the Sun plunges into Libra and your intimate eighth house of merging and joint ventures. From emotional bonds to business undertakings, you're going all in—or making a clean break. There's no gray area or half-stepping now. For the next four weeks, tend to the blazes of your most consuming connections or pour yourself into a passion project that keeps you wild-eyed into the wee hours. You've got license to #obsess as long as you give your fierce focus to a worthwhile cause.

With expansive Jupiter completing a 13-month lap through Libra on October 10, your get one last chance to lean all the way into those depths. Jupiter is the risk taker of our skies. You might just go for it and get engaged, partner up financially or complete a transformational period of spiritual growth. If you've been unsure how enmeshed to get with another person or entity, use this time to explore the options fully.

Stay mindful that you don't veer into controlling or power-tripping turf—or jump rashly in OR out. On September 28, Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition with shock jock Uranus in your second house of work, money and self-esteem. Jupiter and Uranus are the most freedom-loving planets, and they're battling for supremacy. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could resurface for a grand finale.

Under these unpredictable and hotheaded skies, there can be curveballs around your feelings, finances or both. An unplanned expense could find you scrambling to cover it or dipping into savings. You may need to scale back some expenses or adjust your financial planning unexpectedly. Work or real estate changes might spring up, creating short-term chaos. If a relationship has become undermining, this opposition will give you the guts to either leave or take charge of the situation.

Unhappy at work? You might have an epiphany about a higher professional calling. But this planetary aspect has "don't quit your day job" written all over it. Resist the temptation to rashly resign. If you're making an investment or any kind, don't just "go with your gut" and skip the proper research. This is the third Jupiter-Uranus face-off, and with any luck, you've learned a few lessons about how haste makes waste. The big teaching here is balance, though you could be tempted to act impulsively or throw the baby out with the bathwater. Breathe, Pisces! You don't have to make life-altering decisions at this EXACT MOMENT.

You'll get by with a little help from your friends starting September 28, when shadowy Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your eleventh house of teamwork and technology. Dynamics have been dicey in group settings since April, when calculating Pluto went rogue. Perhaps you discovered someone untrustworthy in your midst or felt energetically drained trying to keep up with everything going on in the world. The current political climate is hard enough for anyone to stomach, much less you, the zodiac's empath. If you've been on a social media hiatus (and who could blame you?), you can get back to posting and connecting without the FOMO and drama. A much-needed time-out could help a wayward collaboration get back on track. Refocus everyone on the shared mission. And feel free to block the haters, trolls and disruptive people who undermine your noble efforts.