1761

I am the poster of this recipe. Thank you all for such nice reviews. You can CUT CALORIES CONSIDERABLY by spraying them with a mister or PAM(TM). I use a "Misto"(TM) filled with olive oil. Also,...

I was very excited to see this recipe, but disappointed by the finished product. It was definitely not a hit with my kid. They were difficult to cook evenly. It was a fine line between crispy an...



LucyDelRey

I am the poster of this recipe. Thank you all for such nice reviews. You can CUT CALORIES CONSIDERABLY by spraying them with a mister or PAM(TM). I use a "Misto"(TM) filled with olive oil. Also,... Read more



Jennie Mittower

I've tried a LOTS of versions of kale chips with LOTS of different results. I've found that the success of the chip depends on three things: how you cook them, how curly the kale is and how much... Read more



Carrieh82

My hubby looked at me like I was crazy when I started making this! LOL We both really liked the finished product. I used butter flavored cooking spray because it seemed easier than spreading the... Read more



Spignardo's

These were really neat. They did have a similar taste to potato chips. I made mine a little too salty but they were great. Even the kids ate them, which is saying something for kale. Read more



Holly

I got this recipe from a local blogger who writes about our local box. She used soy sauce instead of the seasoning salt and they came out heavenly. Read more



ShaunaMcC

So. Very. Good. I've been looking to an alternative to munching chips in front of the TV at night, and these are awesome, especially when you've had enough hummus for the week:). For those wh... Read more



Localfoodmama

I was very excited to see this recipe, but disappointed by the finished product. It was definitely not a hit with my kid. They were difficult to cook evenly. It was a fine line between crispy an... Read more



kareno

These are indeed a good conversation item. They all got eaten, but it took a few days. I'll make these again, and this time will not stir in the middle of the baking time (it seemed like a goo... Read more