Do accountable care organizations just offer H.M.O.-style managed care by another name? My colleague Rick Mayes, of the University of Richmond, and I addressed this question in a paper published in Health Affairs. We concluded that the accountable care organizations, by and large, are devised more in response to the shortcomings of H.M.O.s than as a copy of them.

Consider, as we did, capitation. One way to view the relationship between an insurer — whether a private company or a public program — and a health care provider (like a hospital or physician group) is the extent to which each bears the risk of health care costs. When care is more costly than expected, who pays the difference? Or, when care is cheaper, who pockets the profit? Capitation is at one extreme: It puts all the financial risk of care on providers because they get a fixed annual or monthly payment per patient no matter how much care the patient uses. This is better for insurers, since it provides budget certainty for them. Though risky for providers, capitation offers them greater incentive to manage care and its costs; but it raises the concern that they’ll economize by providing less care than patients require.

Contrast capitation with more typical financial arrangements in which insurers bear most or all of the risk of health care costs. When it began in 1965, Medicare — like most insurers at the time — paid doctors whatever cost they claimed, so long as it was “usual, customary and reasonable.” And Medicare originally paid hospitals their claimed costs plus a bit more, a built-in profit. If a patient used more care, the doctor or hospital got paid more and the insurer bore the extra cost.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Though Medicare and private insurers have since moved away from standards such as these, by and large they have not moved very far. Most health care policy experts point to this feature of health care in the United States as one of the major contributors to its growing costs.

An exception to this type of financing was the experiment with capitation in the 1990s. Its ascendance at that time was fueled in part by managed care organizations’ desire to limit financial exposure. By the end of the decade, about one-third of physicians had capitation contracts, accounting for 21 percent of their total revenue. However, many providers were unable to keep the cost of care below capitation rates and suffered large financial losses. Many survived only by growing larger, consolidating with other provider groups, gaining sufficient clout to negotiate more favorable terms with insurers, including getting out from under capitation entirely.

Capitation and H.M.O.s waned after the 1990s, but some think they’re coming back under the guise of accountable care organizations and that they will, therefore, suffer the same fate. That’s not quite right. Accountable care organizations are not H.M.O.s. As the Harvard health economist David Cutler wrote in his recent book, the latter are insurers that “dictate to doctors and patients what they are allowed to do and what they cannot,” which was a significant source of friction between patients and insurers in the 1990s. Accountable care organizations, in contrast, are providers that “decide on good care and work with patients to provide that care.” Another difference that improves the experience of Medicare patients is that Medicare accountable care organizations do not require beneficiaries to receive all their care within the organization for it to be reimbursed, as H.M.O.s typically would.

A.C.O.-like contracts typically do not rely on full capitation. Instead, they usually put providers at risk for a portion of the cost of care; that risk is shared with insurers, somewhat sidestepping a major financial challenge to providers under 1990s-style capitation. Another big difference is that 1990s H.M.O.s and capitation contracts didn’t require providers to meet quality targets to receive full payment. Today’s accountable care organizations tie bonus payments to quality, a feature intended to mitigate against providers sacrificing quality for lower cost. Finally, accountable care organizations are developing in a climate of far better information resources — electronic medical records and techniques for using the data they collect for quality measurement and improvement — than existed in the 1990s.

So, in a variety of ways, the design of accountable care organizations has evolved from that of capitation-based H.M.O.s. Nevertheless, both capitation and the accountable care organization model encourage providers to integrate. If accountable care organizations are able to use greater market clout to negotiate higher prices, they may not lead to the savings many hope for. Indeed, coinciding with the rise of accountable care organizations or in response to it, a growing number of hospitals have merged, integrated with physician groups or offered their own insurance products, among other types of alliances that increase market power.

The takeaway is this: New health care payment models have evolved from those that proved unsustainable in the past, but that doesn’t mean they’re guaranteed to be long-term successes. Vivity is not just the next H.M.O.