You're at the butcher, and you spot a good-looking cut of meat on sale for a low price, but once you buy it, you realize you have no idea whether it's tough or tender, or what you should do with it. Should you throw the meat on a hot grill, or are you going to need to cook that cut low and slow?

ChefSteps offers a simple visual tool to help answer that question. The next time you find yourself wondering about a piece of meat, stop and think about what part of the animal the cut came from (if you don't know, your butcher can tell you) and figure out its approximate location on the video above. More from ChefSteps on what you should visualize:

A great way to memorize which muscle are tough and which are tender is to remember that, beginning with the center of the cow's back, and moving down and outwards along its body from there, the muscles go from most tender to most tough.

Once you've determined the cut's location, you ask yourself what that piece of the animal spent its time doing. Did that body part spend a lot of time engaged in physical activity, or actively supporting the animal and its weight? If so, it will be full of connective tissue and collagen, and taste stringy and tough unless it's braised or roasted for a long period of time.

Advertisement

For example, muscles that do a lot of work — think shanks, shoulders, cheeks (mammals do lots of chewing!), ribs, and brisket — have a lot of collagen and are quite tough, so they need to be cooked low and slow. But with enough time at a consistent heat, the collagen will transform into gelatin, making these cuts of meat meltingly tender and full of body. On the other hand, muscles in the cow's back (such as coveted steak cuts, like the tenderloin, T-bone, New York strip, filet mignon) don't do much at all, so as a result, they're naturally tender, and can seared quickly at high heat to a perfect medium rare desired doneness.

Decoding Tough & Tender Cuts | ChefSteps

Photo by ChefSteps.

Skillet is a new blog from Lifehacker all about being awesome in the kitchen. Follow us on Twitter here.