Advertisement

Gifts for the Wedding Party Don’t forget the bridesmaids, groomsmen and parents. Here are ways to make them feel special, too. Image Credit

Most brides and grooms are consumed with planning the details of their wedding, from the venue to the menu. But the event isn’t only about them. Bridal etiquette also requires the soon-to-be-wed couple to give thoughtful gifts to their parents and the bridal party. Many who have been in other wedding parties already have the usual monogrammed stud boxes and gold or silver charms on a chain.

Following is a list of other not-so-ordinary items to give, each under $100. If monogrammed gifts are still in the plan, perhaps something different like socks or luggage tags would please your wedding party.

Bridesmaids



Image Credit MoMA

1. Bold Japanese Tote

This blue pleated tote bag , made in Japan of polyester produced from renewable sources like tapioca roots, is lightweight and hand washable; it is also available in red.

$48 from MoMA, momastore.org , 800-851-4509 .

Image Credit Misfit

2. Sleek Fitness Tracker

The Misfit Shine 2 is a slim aluminum tracker that keeps time and tracks steps, distance, calories burned and light sleep. It has an alarm, vibrates when there is a text or message (syncs wirelessly to a smartphone) and can be connected to control household devices. It is water-resistant for swimming; the Misfit Shine 2 comes in six colors.

Advertisement

$99.99 from Misfit, misfit.com .

Image Credit Mon Purse

3. Monogrammed Cosmetic Pouch

The Halo makeup bag is a grainy-leather cosmetics pouch lined in suede. It zips closed and has one interior pocket. The bag, which comes in 20 colors, can be monogrammed with a name or initials.

$80 from Mon Purse, us.monpurse.com

Image Credit Mark & Graham

4. Personalized Jewelry Organizer

This zippered travel jewelry case , made of vegan material (for the vegetarians in the party), is lined in soft linen and holds earrings, necklaces and bracelets. It is offered in six colors and can be monogrammed.

$59 from Mark & Graham, markandgraham.com .

Groomsmen

Image Credit Mark & Graham

1. Cocktail Handbook

The hand-bound, leather-covered book “ The Gentleman’s Guide to Cocktails” gives cocktail recipes for basic drinks as well as unusual ones and also has information about necessary extras like gear, etiquette and some pop-culture tidbits.

$99, (monogramming is free), from Mark & Graham, markandgraham.com .

Image Credit

2. Clip-On iPhone Lens

The Olloclip 4 in 1 lens for an iPhone has a fisheye lens, a wide-angle lens and two macro lenses all in one clip-on piece.

$79.99 from B&H, bhphotovideo.com , 800-894-9703 .

Image Credit MoMA

3. Sound-Blocking Travel Pillow

Many of the men in the party may travel a lot and the reversible ostrich travel pillow , handmade in Spain, filled with silicone microbeads to muffle sound and block light, can be a welcome accessory to carry along; the pillow can be used as a neck support or an eye-mask head pillow.

$40 from MoMA momastore.org , 800-851-4509 .

Image Credit

4. Personalized Socks

Who doesn’t need more socks? These Supima cotton monogrammed socks fit sizes 10 to 13 and can be personalized on the ankle and across the toes.

$50 for a set of five pairs of socks from Uncommongoods.com, 888-365-0056 .

Parents

Image Credit

1. For Green Thumbs

A set of two books, “ The Plant Recipe” and “The Flower Recipe ” teach the art of flower and plant arranging by showing how to mix and match species and what containers are best to use. Each book is signed by the authors.

$49 for the set from Food52, food52.com.

Image Credit

2. GPS for the Golf Lover

For the mother or father golfer, the Garmin Approach G10 Golf GPS is lightweight and clips onto anything. It also has an odometer for those who prefer to walk the course rather than ride. The device comes loaded with specs on over 40,000 courses worldwide.

$99.99 from intheholegolf.com , 888-733-8383 .

Image Credit Williams-Sonoma

3. Brand Your Steaks

For parents who grill in the backyard, here is a monogrammed steak branding and board set that includes one miniature hand-forged branding iron and a New England birch-wood board, also monogrammed.

$69.95 from Williams-Sonoma, williams-sonoma.com, (available online only).

Image Credit Pottery Barn

4. Customized Baggage Tags

Silver-plated engravable luggage tags come on either black or dark brown leather straps. A set of two for each parent is useful.

Advertisement

$12 each and monogramming is extra; from Pottery Barn, potterybarn.com .

Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love) , Twitter ( Styles, Fashion and Vows) and Instagram .