Photo

To the Editor:

Marilyn Suzanne Miller asks why baby boomers are in such a bad mood (“Decline of the Boomer,” Sunday Review, July 23). Well, I’ll tell you, and it’s not because I’m being ignored by the culture, as she asserts.

I’m 68 and came of age in the late 1960s, graduating from college in 1971. I thought that by now, nearly 50 years later, the promise of living in a progressive, tolerant society would be fulfilled.

Instead, the 2016 election brought us Donald Trump, who has not only unleashed a tidal wave of intolerance, but who also seems hellbent on taking us back to the cultural dark ages and wrecking the planet as he does so.

He and his administration are a dark cloud that won’t go away.

RICK DEREVAN, ATASCADERO, CALIF.

To the Editor:

Marilyn Suzanne Miller describes the new middle age of baby boomers in their 60s as the most despised age ever — a time of decline, loss and shrinking social value. As a septuagenarian looking back, I have another perspective.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Rather than the end of middle age, my experience suggests that in our 60s we would do well to understand ourselves at the start of what sociologists call “young-old age.” Here we may be surprised to find that we return to the same provocative questions that make adolescence such a challenging time: Who am I? What makes life meaningful?

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Like teenagers, the young-old must adapt to a rapidly changing, no longer reliable body and shifting social roles as we transition out of long-held jobs. We must also renegotiate the meaning of dependency. We may also become risk takers again, starting new work, travel and relationships.

Not a Pollyanna, I side with Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, who reminds us that “age is opportunity no less than youth itself.”