Photo

There was an unusual degree of consensus among economists about what would happen if Britain voted for Brexit in the referendum on June 23 last year. The language used by the International Monetary Fund was typical: It expressed fears of an “abrupt reaction,” adding that this “may have already begun.” The head of the organization, Christine Lagarde, said that the consequences of Brexit would range from “pretty bad to very, very bad.” The Bank of England warned of a recession, a contraction in gross domestic product and an increase in unemployment. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development published a paper called “The Economic Consequences of Brexit,” predicting a “major negative shock to the U.K. economy.” Even pro-Brexit economists expected an immediate downturn: Gerard Lyons, former economic adviser to the prominent Brexiter Boris Johnson, said that the trajectory would resemble the “Nike swoosh” — down then up.

What happened instead was that Britain enjoyed the best growth of any major advanced economy in 2016. The doomsayers have been quick to point out that Brexit hasn’t actually happened yet, so all the promised shock has been postponed rather than averted — which, for the record, is what I think, too. Still, it’s all a bit embarrassing for everyone who made those overconfident forecasts. Andy Haldane, the chief economist for the Bank of England, which was one of the sources of those doomy prognostications, agrees. He compared the pitfalls of economic prediction to the single most famously wrong weather forecast in British history, made on the BBC on Oct. 15, 1987. A woman had called the BBC to say she was worried there was a hurricane on the way. “Don’t worry, there isn’t,” the weatherman responded. That night, 22 people died amid hurricane-force winds.

This isn’t the first time Haldane has been critical of the current state of macroeconomics — that’s the big-picture, whole-economy side of the profession. Last fall he gave an important, broad-ranging speech with the elegant title “The Dappled World,” in which he argued that the unexpected global downturn that began in late 2007 has left behind “a crisis in the economics and finance profession.” Economic forecasts on the eve of the credit crunch and the Great Recession were, he says, “not just wrong but spectacularly so.” The overall trajectory of precrisis forecasts was upward; the reality was a brutally deep capital V.

The reason this poses a deep intellectual crisis for macroeconomics is that the entire point of the field, as it has developed since the work of John Maynard Keynes in the 1930s, is to prevent just this sort of severe downturn. Keynes once spoke of a future in which economists would be “humble, competent people on a level with dentists,” while the brilliant up-and-coming French economist Esther Duflo recently gave an admired I.M.F. lecture called “The Economist as Plumber.” It seems to me, though, that what macroeconomists do is really most like bomb disposal. Uniquely in the social sciences and humanities, macroeconomics was developed with a specific, real-world purpose, and a negative purpose to boot: to stop anything like the Great Depression from ever happening again. Given this goal — to avert systemic crises and downturns — the credit crunch and the Great Recession were, for macroeconomics, an intellectual disaster.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In retrospect, the failure of the discipline to predict and prevent the crisis was based on deep conceptual faults. One of these concerned a mysterious refusal to engage with the role of the banking and finance system in the economy. Another was the assumption that the discipline makes about individual motivations, assuming that individuals “optimize” their decision-making to behave, in economic terms, rationally. This is a convenient intellectual shortcut for building models, but it is also a fiction, as we know not just from our own human experience but even from within economics itself, where microeconomics has recently made exciting progress in the study of human irrationality, bias and cognitive error. It is a matter of provable fact that our decision-making is not entirely rational. Economic models built on the premise of our rationality will always have a creaky underpinning.

Photo

The focus of Haldane’s speech is on this second point. He talks about the need for macroeconomics to learn from other disciplines in both the natural and social sciences in order to seek “a different perspective on individual behavior and systemwide dynamics.” He argues that the profession has “borrowed too little from other disciplines” and become “a methodological monoculture,” with the associated risk that everybody in the field can be wrong in the same way and at the same time. He finds compelling evidence in a survey of American professors of social science, who were asked whether “interdisciplinary” knowledge was better than knowledge “obtained by a single discipline.” Most social scientists sensibly thought that the answer was yes, by overwhelming margins. But 57 percent of economists disagreed or strongly disagreed. Economists literally think they have nothing to learn from anyone else. The field also suffers from its rigid hierarchies and its lack of gender and racial diversity. As Haldane puts it, “It is difficult to escape the conclusion that economics remains an insular, self-referential discipline.”