Mouratoglou said Williams seemed perfectly prepared for the match, but it is impossible to ever tell until the match begins.

“I know her perfectly,” he said. “I know exactly how she is. But I have to see her on the tennis court. Off the tennis court you can always fake. On the tennis court you cannot.”

Heading to Work

Black cars and limousines were double-parked in front of the St. Regis on East 55th Street, near the corner of Fifth Avenue. It was Tuesday afternoon, the day after Labor Day, and Serena and Venus Williams were hours from playing each other in the quarterfinals. A silver Mercedes GL450, part of a fleet of courtesy cars used to transport players to and from Queens, was called to the front and parked at the curb.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The St. Regis is a place of white marble floors, brass doors, crystal chandeliers, painted frescoes and heavy curtains. Uniformed bellmen inside wear flat-topped caps. A chicken-club sandwich at the lobby bar costs $33. A looping jazz soundtrack is tucked behind the din of conversation.

On different upper floors, Serena and Venus Williams had their own suites, each with a kitchen. They shared a chef who prepared their meals, packing Serena’s in a green Whole Foods bag and Venus’s in an orange one to take to the tennis center each day.

The sisters spent most of the past two weeks sequestered in those rooms, sometimes together. They shared a physical therapist, from Mouratoglou’s tennis academy in France, who came to their rooms and set up a training table for off-day treatment.

Family members stayed at a different hotel, keeping their distance, ready when called upon.

“She texts me and is like: ‘What are you doing? Can you come over?’” their sister Isha Price said.

Groups were small and visits were short, usually taking place on the afternoons between matches.

“I just say hello, and then I go,” Oracene Price, their mother, said. “It’s like they’re focused so much. I don’t want to interfere with that. They’re grown women.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Serena Williams spent much of her time watching Netflix and crime-show episodes she downloaded from the Investigation Discovery network. She watched some tennis. In past years, when she got stir crazy, Williams has summoned a dinner or a karaoke outing, and Isha Price found a place and gathered the family. That did not happen this time.

“She pretty much has down to a science what works for her,” Price said. “She really likes to be in her own space, be quiet.”

On Labor Day, though, Williams finally ventured out. Paparazzi spotted her having evening tea at an Italian restaurant in Greenwich Village with Kim Kardashian.

The next afternoon, at 3:33 p.m., Williams followed Haupt out of the cool lobby and into the thick, 95-degree air of Midtown Manhattan. One of the two small leather bags slung over her shoulder contained Chip.

She slowed only to sign an autograph for a young girl who had been waiting nearly an hour. A couple of photographers backpedaled while snapping pictures as she walked toward the car and slid into a rear seat. Haupt put her Wilson tennis bag, her MCM handbag and her green Whole Foods bag, containing her dinner, into the back, then climbed in next to her.

In 30 seconds she was gone, and in 54 minutes of late-afternoon traffic she was at the tournament, headed to the practice court. The sidewalk in front of the St. Regis settled back into routine instantly, as if nothing happened.

A second Mercedes courtesy car, a large van marked with the U.S. Open logo, pulled into the open spot. Venus Williams’s hitting coach, David Witt, and two others stood on the sidewalk, one holding an orange Whole Foods bag.

At 3:55, Venus emerged from the hotel. There was nobody there to ask for an autograph or take a picture. The four got into the van and turned the corner on Fifth Avenue.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Venus and Serena had played each other professionally 26 times, 13 at the majors, and every one was intriguing to fans and tortuous to the sisters. There is little joy of one advancing in a tournament at the expense of the other. The questions come, as they have for 20 years, some version of “What is it like?”

Both said, as they have always said, that they treat their sister as they do any other opponent, but no one has ever believed that blood and tennis can be divided so cleanly.

Venus Williams, 35 and seven years removed from the last of her seven major titles, was having her best season since 2010. In 2011, she learned she has Sjogren’s syndrome, an autoimmune disorder that causes joint pain, among other symptoms, and withdrew from that year’s U.S. Open. Her stellar career never recovered. She arrived this year ranked and seeded 23rd, an on-court afterthought expected mostly to answer questions about her sister’s quest.

But she won her first three matches, one over 12th-seeded Belinda Bencic, who had handed Serena one of her two losses in 2015, in Toronto in August.

The Williams sisters played back-to-back matches on Ashe in the afternoon of the tournament’s middle Sunday. Their older sister Lyndrea Price, a Jehovah’s Witness like much of the family, texted each a Bible verse, as she did before most matches.

“Be courageous, don’t be afraid, because Jehovah is with you wherever you go,” she wrote, paraphrasing Joshua 1:9.

Venus Williams breezed past the 19-year-old qualifier Anett Kontaveit, 6-2, 6-1. The door from the court opened and a warm rush of air and sound carried Venus inside. Serena headed toward the court for her match with 20-year-old Madison Keys, seeded 19th, a potentially slippery rematch of the Australian Open semifinal.

Venus and Serena passed each other, shoulder to shoulder, without a word. As close as they were off the court, they treated each other without a glimmer of recognition at the tennis center.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Serena Williams soon dispatched Keys in straight sets.

“You hate that it has to happen at the stage that it’s happening,” Isha Price said. “But one thing about it, it means that they’re playing really, really well — well enough to both get to the quarterfinals. And the positive is that you know one of them will be in the semis.”

Serena Williams was 15-11 against Venus in their professional careers, and 8-5 at Grand Slams. (Among women, only Martina Navratilova and Chris Evert have met more times, 22, at majors during the Open era.) But she rarely beat her older sister when they were children.

“I’m playing, for me, the best player in the tournament, and that’s never easy,” Serena Williams said. “She’s beaten me so many times. I’ve taken a lot of losses off her — more than anybody. She’s a player that knows how to win, knows how to beat me, and knows my weaknesses better than anyone.”

“It’s like playing a mirror,” she added.

The next morning, they arrived separately but practiced side by side, not unlike the days on the worn courts at the corner of Compton Boulevard and Lime Avenue, when Richard Williams worked with one girl on one court and Oracene worked with the other on another.

“Side by side, that’s crazy,” a man in the front row of the practice court bleachers whispered to a friend.

They did not look at one another. Serena Williams practiced for 2 hours 20 minutes, her longest session of the tournament. She started 30 minutes before Venus arrived and stayed 30 minutes after Venus left. She ran past her practice court time allotment, and slid over to take Venus’s abandoned court when Andy Murray arrived.

Again, they did not acknowledge each other publicly. Afterward, at the St. Regis, they spent part of the afternoon with a teenage nephew, Jair, a son of their sister Yetunde, who was killed by a gang member in Compton in 2003.

On match day, after arriving in separate cars, they warmed up with two practice courts between them. Serena started first and ended first, their times intentionally staggered partly because they shared a physical therapist who provided prematch treatment.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Serena Williams spent most of the 90 minutes before the scheduled 7 p.m. start time in a small room next to the gym on the third floor. She had no contact with anyone in her family, which passed time on the couches in the second-floor players’ lounge. Kardashian was there, with a grim-faced bodyguard lurking over her shoulder. Oracene Price was not; avoiding the spectacle and stress, she watched on television. (Richard Williams, who stepped away from guiding Serena’s career when Mouratoglou took over at Wimbledon in 2012, did not attend the tournament.)

Williams ate the dinner she brought from the hotel. Shilstone helped her devise a Mediterranean-style diet years ago, with lots of vegetables, some chicken and fish, and little wheat or gluten. For years, the prematch meal was chicken, brown rice and “nongassy vegetables,” Shilstone said. She leaned toward more fish now.

At 5:30, as he did before every match, he brought her “Serena’s sushi” — crab, brown rice and cucumber. (Never avocado, which Williams detests.) For a couple of days, the sushi contained no cucumber because of a nationwide salmonella scare. Shilstone also brought her two oranges, a prematch staple since Williams was a girl.

Fifteen minutes before the match, under Shilstone’s gaze, Williams wore headphones and did her prematch warm-up in the third-floor workout room. She held 21-ounce gel balls and simulated her arm and shoulder movements. She did the same with a five-pound ball, threading it between her legs and dropping and catching it. She used elastic bands to mimic her various swings, but in reverse.

“If you hit forward, you have to do the opposite,” Shilstone said. “Reverse your serve, reverse your backhand, reverse your forehand. Everything in this game is deceleration. Because once you hit, you have to get the racket back again. You have to decelerate. The shoulder, the hip, the elbow and the ankle all can work in four different ranges of motion. You can never forget that.”