“But I’m not a cartoon character,” she said. “People read my poetry and this and that, and when they meet me at the track, they think there’ll be a — ta-da! — a show or something. At home, I’m mostly quiet and often asleep.”

Molded by Past

So what, then, makes Pappas run … and write … and act … and emote at will?

It could be a response to her upbringing in Alameda, Calif., a spit of land between Oakland and San Francisco Bay.

Her mother, Roberta, committed suicide when Alexi was 4. Pappas said she had few memories of her mother — memories of memories, actually — and was effusive in her praise for her father, John, and her older brother, Louis, for raising her (“Louis taught me to shave my legs; my dad took me bra shopping”) in a house devoid of a feminine influence.

When she came of age, Pappas talked to her father and her mother’s close friends, seeking to understand her mother’s actions but also simply to find out what her mother was like.

Photo

“How can someone be so sad that they’d want to leave?” Pappas said. “What I think it was, maybe she didn’t have someone to share what she was going through. Her close friends told me she didn’t talk or emote, at least not like I do.”

As a teenager, Pappas vowed not to be so insulated. She would instead fling open her interior life like French window shutters flapping in a stiff breeze.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Alexi tries to be open and talk honestly with people,” said Teicher, who met Pappas at Dartmouth when they were studying film and theater. “She talks about her fears and how hard things can be. That’s why people are drawn to her. That’s also something I, as the boyfriend, actually admire.

“Making an independent film is hard. It’s hard to keep pushing forward and be positive, just like in her running. But she keeps me going.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Sports Newsletter Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

For Pappas, self-expression is a form of self-preservation.

“When I think of my mom, it makes me … I don’t know, let’s just say that’s why at least somebody knows everything about me,” she said. “I mean, if I have a bad sandwich, I’ll tell Jeremy. If I see a weird leaf on a run, maybe it’ll become a poetry tweet. I’m making it so that people hold on to the things going on inside me.”

Pappas’s varied interests, as well as her intention to share them, have raised a few eyebrows in Eugene, where the populace takes its running quite seriously. Pappas and others say they have heard the criticism that she could improve her times if she stopped dividing her interests.

“She gets criticized from all angles — the film and the track and field,” said Jordan Hasay, an elite distance runner who was Pappas’s teammate on the University of Oregon cross-country team that won the 2012 N.C.A.A. women’s title. (Pappas was granted a fifth year of eligibility after graduating from Dartmouth and ran for Oregon while completing a master’s degree.)

“But that’s what works for her,” Hasay said. “You find happiness in different areas. It wouldn’t be enough for her to focus on just one thing. It doesn’t hinder her, only enhances her.”

Photo

Pappas’s coach, the Olympian Ian Dobson, said he not only accepted but also embraced her choices. When “Tracktown” was filming last year in Eugene, forcing Pappas to miss three weeks of training, Dobson did not object, he said. He said the fact that Pappas “came late to the sport” — meaning college — gave her “fresher legs” and more maturity.

But that can also be a disadvantage when it comes to racing strategy and picking up the nuances of training, Dobson said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Maybe she’d be better if the film took this much time,” Dobson said, holding his hands a few inches apart, “instead of this much time,” his hands now a foot apart.

“But if the film wasn’t there, I don’t think that would be good for her at all,” he said. “Alexi has momentum in her life. That’s what she runs on. She also has the ability to be focused on more than one thing without diminishing either.”