Seasons change, friendships come and go, time passes, but the one thing that we knew for sure would be forever? Our zodiac signs. The stars in the sky — and our birthdays — are permanent. Unfortunately, NASA did not get the memo.

Apparently, earlier this year, NASA quietly announced they were just going right ahead and changing the whole zodiac system without even asking anyone. They assigned new dates to each zodiac sign AND an entire fake sign has been added. Thanks to NASA, the world is in a panic.

NASA had to shake up all our lives because the Earth is a little different from the way it was back when the Babylonians created the zodiac we knew and loved. "Now, 3,000 years later, the sky has shifted because Earth's axis (North Pole) doesn't point in quite the same direction," the NASA explanation says.

And in order to make their zodiac calendar seem perfect (12 month calendar, 12 zodiac signs, one sign for each month — you get it) the Babylonians straight up ignored a 13th constellation, and NASA has taken it upon themselves to set things "right." So, for those born between November 29 and December 17, meet your "new" sign: Ophiuchus... seriously. You are a guy holding a snake, and your standout traits are a penchant for seeking knowledge and being envied by your peers.

For the rest of you, check out the new dates for each sign, which we will ignore moving forward.

Aries: April 18 – May 13

The Ram: courageous, passionate, impulsive

Taurus: May 13 – June 21

The Bull: reliable, devoted, stubborn

Gemini: June 21 – July 20

The Twins: curious, gentle, indecisive

Cancer: July 20 – Aug 10

The Crab: imaginative, sympathetic, manipulative

Leo: Aug 10 – Sept 16

The Lion: cheerful, generous, arrogant

Virgo: Sept 16 – Oct 30

The Virgin: analytical, hardworking, shy

Libra: Oct 30 – Nov 23

The Scales: social, fair-minded, self-pitying

Scorpio: Nov 23 – Nov 29

The Scorpion: resourceful, brave, distrusting

Ophiuchus: Nov 29 – Dec 17

The Serpent Bearer: Knowledge-seeking, admired, envied

Sagittarius: Dec 17 – Jan 20

The Centaur: idealistic, humorous, impatient

Capricorn: Jan 20 - Feb 16

The Goat: disciplined, responsible, condescending

Aquarius: Feb 16 – March 11

The Water Bearer: independent, humanitarian, temperamental

Pisces: March 11 – April 18

The Fish: artistic, compassionate, weak-willed

Related: How to Be Happier Right Now, Based on Your Zodiac Sign