The last time you saw an all-white room did you feel comfortable or did you feel timid and afraid to relax? White is one of those colors that many homeowners shy away from, as they are nervous about making an all-white room feel comfortable and welcoming. White can be the most refreshing color of the spectrum. It can evoke purity, cleanliness, but also confidence and sophistication. Before you decide that your home could never “do white” look at these 10 quick tips to get a wow factor when decorating with all-white color. You may be surprised how easily comfortable white can be in your interiors.

1. Start with a white room as a blank slate:

Instead of getting intimidated by white, look at white as a fresh start to do whatever you want and go wherever your creativity will take you! White rooms are a great way to find out what inspires your room. Do you have a killer view of the ocean, trees, mountains or city? White is a beautiful canvas to use as a backdrop for your gorgeous vistas. Instead of engulfing your whole room in a color, try white and see what speaks to you in your home.

2. Use white in your modern or traditional kitchen:

The beauty of white is its versatile range to go from an ultra creamy white that pairs well with traditional and classical wooden kitchen cabinets with Carrera marble counters to ultra modern white lacquer finish minimal kitchens with waterfall edge countertops. Many homeowners love white in the kitchen because it feels clean and classic. Many kitchen appliance manufacturers now offer appliances in white too!

3. White and your favorite metals are a timeless combination

Have you noticed the latest trends in interiors pair neutral colors such as white, black, grays and browns with classic metal color combinations? White and stainless steel, brass, copper and gold are all trending in home interiors and the look is warm and inviting. Whether you pair white with stainless steel appliances in the kitchen or with brass lighting fixtures in your living room. Metals reflectance is a great pairing with the crispness of white.

4. Don’t shy away from white upholstery

You may be thinking that white upholstery is harder to keep clean or it shows dirt quickly. While this may be true, consider what type of room will match the fabric type for which you use it in. In living and family rooms with busy traffic – consider using faux leather and faux suedes, also khaki and white denim slipcovers are ideal for homes with pets and active kids. Don’t shy away from white because of the color – instead use fabric suitable for your busy home.

5. Let a piece of artwork take center stage amongst white

One of the greatest assets of working with the color white is the ability to showcase your own personality and style in your interiors, without having to compete with the color on the walls, furniture and decor. If you love artwork, sculptural pieces, or any elements that command attention, consider displaying it on an all-white wall, over an all-white fireplace mantle or over your all-white bed. All eyes will go right to your one-of-a-kind artwork without you having to try!

6. Choose the best shade of white for your decor

Believe it or not, there are hundreds of shades of white and all of them do not look like versions of beige! Every color in the spectrum has a white version of it. From pinks and yellows to greens and purples, there are underlying faint hints of color in a variety of whites. Choose what furniture and decor your home has the majority of color in. Look to kitchen cabinets, flooring, countertops and tile in your bathroom for color cues on how to choose the best underlying colored white. There are several ‘perfect whites’ for every home.

7. Layer tone-on-tone whites for a warmer room

If your room is lacking personality or warmth, consider layering whites in similar shades of white, warm whites, gray, warm grays, etc.… Use patterns, textures and varying materials in similar white hues to create a room that has depth and interest. This especially works well in bedrooms. Textiles, an upholstered headboard, window treatments and bedding can all work together in harmony in varying shades of tone-on-tone white varieties.

8. White can make your interiors versatile all year around:

White creates a canvas for you to decorate in different ways all year around. Whether you love to usher in autumn with gorgeous rustic tones of red, yellow, and burnt umber or change to bright colors and pastels in spring, an all-white interior gives you the versatility to change at a whim! Swap out accent rugs, throw pillows, window treatments, bed linen to create a seasonal home that is versatile and welcoming all year around. In summer time an all-white interior is cool and refreshing and may not need seasonal colors at all.

9. Bring color into your room to highlight white bathroom features

Nothing says “Wow” like an eye-catching color amongst a sea of white interior walls in a bathroom. A white bathtub, sink basin and flooring can look striking against any color that adds punch and pizazz to the eye. Red mosaic tile, teal and aqua glass tiles, or even a monochromatic metallic steel tile accent wall will make any all-white bathroom look sophisticated and cosmopolitan!

10. Use white to make all the “blemishes” go away:

White can also work like an eraser in your interiors. Whether your home has some architectural mishaps, exposed mechanical ducts, or overhead unsightly blemishes in the drywall – white can camouflage the eyesores. In older homes, white can help highlight gorgeous crown molding and craftsman details can be highlighted with gorgeous white. Transform your home by using all-white interiors and see how comfort is closer than you once thought!

Freshome readers tell us your tricks for using white in your interiors.