Yup. The fact that his buddy doesn't take the time to ask her personal questions (you know, stuff like, "What are your hopes and dreams for a brighter tomorrow?" ... or maybe, "How do you think we can simultaneously solve the oft-conflicting problems of world hunger and depleted rain forests?") is clearly a sign that the relationship is doomed.

What kind of consequences he can expect:

Here's another appropriate item from Cosmo's revenge list:

"You know his best friend -- the guy he can't live without? Show up at his apartment wearing only a trench coat."



What man could say no to the sexual advances of his best friend's abusive, crazy girlfriend?

See, there you go. Your best friend wouldn't talk to her, which is clearly your fault, so now she's going to sexually destroy every meaningful relationship in your life. But on the upside, at least Cosmo's avatar of destruction on Earth has shifted its attention from you and focused the white hot laser of its wrath on your best friend instead. Now you're free! Sure, you're a broken, unemployed, impotent and psychologically ruined human being with no ties -- material or personal -- to the world at large. But hey, you're a perfect candidate for both homelessness and cultism ... things are looking up!



Enjoy pooping in boxes and muttering vaguely about "that bitch" for the rest of your natural life.

Check out more of Dennis' musings on dating and relationships here.

You know what that subscription to Cosmo could buy you instead? Our bestselling book.

For more reasons to never trust Cosmo, ever, check out 7 Sex Tips from Cosmo That Will Put You in the Hospital. Or learn about some other places you shouldn't got to for love advice, in The 5 Worst Places to Go for Online Sex Advice.

And stop by Linkstorm to learn the proper medical procedures for remedying all the terrible stuff above.

And don't forget to follow us on Facebook and Twitter to get sexy, sexy jokes sent straight to your news feed.

Do you have an idea in mind that would make a great article? Then sign up for our writers workshop! Do you possess expert skills in image creation and manipulation? Mediocre? Even rudimentary? Are you frightened by MS Paint and simply have a funny idea? You can create an infograpic and you could be on the front page of Cracked.com tomorrow!