DragonCon was held this past weekend in Atlanta, Georgia, and the convention announced today the recipients of the second annual Dragon Awards. The prize is designed to be a “true reflection” of what science fiction and fantasy fans like and enjoy, and was marked with some controversy earlier this summer.

This year’s winners included the latest Expanse novel from James S.A. Corey, Babylon’s Ashes, as well as Larry Correia and John Ringo’s Monster Hunter Memoirs: Grunge, Cory Doctorow’s Walkaway, Netflix’s Stranger Things, and Nintendo’s The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. A full list of the winners can be seen below.

The awards were founded as an alternative to the better-known Hugo Awards, issued annually at the World Science Fiction convention, and includes a range of novels, comics, video games, television shows, and movies.

This year’s awards were not without some controversy: several authors complained that the stories they were nominated for were being used by right-wing groups as a sort of proxy in a genre culture war. The convention initially refused to let them withdraw their works from the ballot, but later backtracked and permitted them to remove themselves. One of the authors who backed out of the ballot, N.K. Jemisin, did come away from the convention with an award: the Eugie Foster Memorial Award for Short Fiction, for her story ”The City Born Great”, although this is unrelated to the Dragon Awards.

Here are the winners (indicated in bold):

Best Science Fiction Novel

Babylon’s Ashes by James S.A. Corey

A Closed and Common Orbit by Becky Chambers

Death’s End by Cixin Liu

Escaping Infinity by Richard Paolinelli

Rise by Brian Guthrie

Space Tripping by Patrick Edwards

The Collapsing Empire by John Scalzi

The Secret Kings by Brian Niemeier

Best Fantasy Novel (Including Paranormal)

Monster Hunter Memoirs: Grunge by Larry Correia and John Ringo

A Sea of Skulls by Vox Day

Beast Master by Shayne Silvers

Blood of the Earth by Faith Hunter

Dangerous Ways by R.R. Virdi

The Heartstone Thief by Pippa DaCosta

Wings of Justice by Michael-Scott Earle

Best Young Adult / Middle Grade Novel

The Hammer of Thor by Rick Riordan

A Court of Wings and Ruin by Sarah J. Maas

Defy the Stars by Claudia Gray

Firebrand by A.J. Hartley

It’s All Fun and Games by Dave Barrett

Rachel and the Many Splendored Dreamland by L. Jagi Lamplighter

Swan Knight’s Son by John C Wright

Best Military Science Fiction or Fantasy Novel

Iron Dragoons by Richard Fox

Allies and Enemies: Exiles by Amy J. Murphy

Caine’s Mutiny by Charles E. Gannon

Cartwright’s Cavaliers by Mark Wandrey

Invasion: Resistance by J.F. Holmes

Star Realms: Rescue Run by Jon Del Arroz

Starship Liberator by B.V. Larson and David VanDyke

The Span of Empire by Eric Flint and David Carrico

Best Alternate History Novel

Fallout: The Hot War by Harry Turtledove

1636: The Ottoman Onslaught by Eric Flint

A Change in Crime by D.R. Perry

Another Girl, Another Planet by Lou Antonelli

Breath of Earth by Beth Cato

No Gods, Only Daimons by Kai Wai Cheah

The Last Days of New Paris by China Mieville

Witchy Eye by D.J. Butler

Best Apocalyptic Novel

Walkaway by Cory Doctorow

A Place Outside the Wild by Daniel Humphreys

American War by Omar El Akkad

Codename: Unsub by Declan Finn and Allan Yoskowitz

The Seventh Age: Dawn by Rick Heinz

ZK: Falling by J.F. Holmes

Best Horror Novel

The Changeling by Victor LaValle

A God in the Shed by J-F Dubeau

Blood of Invidia by Tom Tinney and Morgen Batten

Donn’s Hill by Caryn Larrinaga

Live and Let Bite by Declan Finn

Nothing Left to Lose by Dan Wells

The Bleak December by Kevin G. Summers

Best Comic Book

The Dresden Files: Dog Men by Jim Butcher, Mark Powers, Diego Galindo

Buffy The Vampire Slayer Season Eleven by Christos Gage, Rebekah Isaacs

Monstress by Marjorie Liu, Sana Takeda

Motor Girl by Terry Moore

Ms. Marvel by G. Willow Wilson, Takeshi Miyazawa

Saga by Brian K Vaughan, Fiona Staples

Wynonna Earp Legends by Beau Smith, Tim Rozon, Melanie Scrofano, Chris Evenhuis

Best Graphic Novel

Jim Butcher’s The Dresden Files: Wild Card by Jim Butcher, Carlos Gomez

Clive Barker Nightbreed #3 by Marc Andreyko, Clive Barker, Emmanuel Xerx Javier

Girl Genius: the Second Journey of Agatha Heterodyne, Book 2: The City of Lightning by Phil and Kaja Foglio

Love is Love by Marc Andreyko, Sarah Gaydos, James S. Rich

March Book 3 by John Lewis, Andrew Aydin

My Favorite Thing is Monsters by Emil Ferris

Stuck in My Head by J.R. Mounts

Best Science Fiction or Fantasy TV Series

Stranger Things , Netflix

Doctor Who, BBC

Lucifer, Fox

Marvel’s Agents of Shield, ABC

Stan Lee’s Lucky Man, Sky1

The Expanse, Syfy

Westworld, HBO

Wynonna Earp, Syfy

Best Science Fiction or Fantasy Movie

Wonder Woman directed by Patty Jenkins

Arrival directed by Denis Villeneuve

Doctor Strange directed by Scott Derrickson

Guardians of the Galaxy Vol. 2 directed by James Gunn

Logan directed by James Mangold

Passengers directed by Morten Tyldum

Rogue One: A Star Wars Story directed by Gareth Edwards

Best Science Fiction or Fantasy PC / Console Game

The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild by Nintendo

Dishonored 2 by Arkane Studios

Final Fantasy XV by Square Enix

Mass Effect: Andromeda by Bioware

NieR: Automata by PlatinumGames

Titanfall 2 by Respawn Entertainment

Best Science Fiction or Fantasy Mobile Game

Pokémon GO by Niantic

Con Man: The Game by Monkey Strength Productions

Fire Emblem Heroes by Nintendo

Monument Valley 2 by Ustwogames

Sky Dancer by Pine Entertainment

Super Mario Run by Nintendo

Best Science Fiction or Fantasy Board Game

Betrayal at House on the Hill: Widow’s Walk by Avalon Hill

Gloomhaven by Cephalofair Games

Hero Realms by White Wizard Games

Mansions of Madness (Second Edition) by Fantasy Flight Games

Scythe by Stonemaier Games

Terraforming Mars by Stronghold Games

Best Science Fiction or Fantasy Miniatures / Collectible Card / Role-Playing Game