If you’re born in 90s, I am sure that you have witnessed the glorious age of the pixel art. It exists on the old-school gaming platform, mobile phone and other digital devices. It’s one of the greatest technological inventions that dominate the digital world for several years, and now it rises again as a definitive art form within the artist community.

Doing the pixel art could mean that you’re striving for perfection, as you even need to manually craft out the shading, dithering and even anti-aliasing. That means you have to draw the artwork pixel by pixel! Therefore it’s called pixel art. Sounds scary, right? Fortunately there are passionate artists who are willing to break their pixel art into comprehensive tutorials for you the possible learners.

Today, with the aim to provide you a solid understanding of the pixel art and its essential techniques, we want to showcase to you 30 detailed and inspiring tutorials by talented pixel artists to help you carve out possibly one of the most detailed works in your life. Whether you have started it or not, it will probably be one of the most interesting and beneficial journey of exploring the better art.

Try on them and you’ll know, full list of tutorials after jump!

Recommended Reading: 50 Beautiful and Creative Pixel Arts

Shading Of A Rock With this tutorial you will learn to draw something that you see often in your life, a rock! You will learn about structuration, shading and special highlighting techniques. I believe from the look it’s not really easy to do, but once you get to draw it, it will be a big step forward to your pixel art mastery!

Textures If you’re into the game development, learning to form the texture will be a critical need for you. Developed by Kiwinuptuo, the tutorial won’t be teaching you to draw texture pixel by pixel, but it will uncover professional tips to enhance your textures into something that look more quality and realistic.

Tree A great tutorial which not only brings you through the process of drawing a pixel tree, but also guides you to structure the tree correctly, and ultimately adding details until it becomes an epic pixel tree.

Adding Pattern Ever wanted to explore the ways to create cute pixel art? Well, KawaiiHannah will guide you to create adorable pixel character with different clothing patterns, and they are all charming for sure!

Human Sprite Master the art of creating industry-standard human sprite by following this extensive tutorial written by Kiwinuptuo, who took a line art and transformed it into fantastic character sprite.

Pixeling a Monster “This tutorial is aimed to guide you from having a limited understanding of pixel art through the several necessary stages on your way to creating a working, professional looking RPG styled monster sprite.”

Colors I found this tutorial inspiring as it’s not something regular that only teaches you about the colors, but explains the “Hue Change Rule” and the right ways of forming a color palette. Probably a worthy tutorial for even an artist!

Reflection

It’s really mind-blowing to hear that in order to do the pixel art, one has to do the shading, dithering and anti-aliasing manually! Those techniques are what I’ve been suffering while learning the line art, and now I need to do them manually on pixel art! That said, heartfelt thanks to all pixel artists that are great and kind enough to uncover their secrets of making the pixel art, thus reviving up this once-fallen yet invaluable art form!

Well, though we have dig into the web and showcased awesome tutorials we have found here, there must be other awe-inspiring tutorials lying in the web somewhere. Do kindly let us know if you stumbled upon it, or if you actually did one, don’t hesitate to show to us! Enjoy pixeling then!

Editor’s Note: Broken links in this post have been found and fixed with updated links. If you find more, feel free to let us know in the comments section below.