Privacy, please! The month gets off to an intense and focused start. The Sun is making its annual plunge into Virgo and your intimate, strategic eighth house. You may be consumed with an undertaking that requires a lot of mental or emotional energy, and by the end of the day, you're spent! Instead of being the lively center of every group fiesta, you're craving small and selective gatherings. It's a very un-Aquarian energy, but no need to fight it. Solitary time in the cocoon, free from chatter and distractions, can be transformational.

But DO pop out if you start to lose perspective or fixate on the same topic. Intense and aggravating Mars is also in Virgo from September 5 to October 22, bringing out a controlling or neurotic streak. Yes, Aquarius, your lesser-seen Type A side can make an appearance, causing you to freak out about money, a relationship or anything that feels too permanent. Mars in this possessive zone could provoke a jealous streak or a wave of obsessing. While your friends will entertain your dramatic retellings to a certain point, even your most loyal crew members may want to give you a little shake. (Hello, Aquarius: Have you forgotten how awesome you are?)

The eighth house rules merging—the place where "me" becomes "we," and borders between people dissolve. There's no separation…we are all one. (Do you feel like you're in a yoga class savasana yet?) This melding can involve anything from sex to emotional bonding to pooling your money on a joint investment. If you're weighing such scenarios this month, don't rush in and expect things will simply figure themselves out. Truth be told, that attitude usually DOES work for your spontaneous sign. You'd rather ask forgiveness than permission, yada yada. But under these stars, a too-hasty "yes" could land you in a messy situation, one that can't be instantly reversed by a doe-eyed apology and winning smile.

So, Aquarius: How about having those crucial conversations BEFORE you engage? Leave no stone unturned as you perform due diligence, check references and learn more about someone's history. If this merger is meant to last the long haul, you'll be wise to get it all spelled out. Trust takes time, but you can still protect yourself with the insurance of clear boundaries. As our friend, Sacred Seduction teacher Kitty Cavalier, writes in this thought-provoking post (http://kittycavalier.com/fiercely-intimate/), "boundaries are the true heroines of intimacy."

Chances are, you've learned that lesson over the past month, as communication planet Mercury has been retrograde from August 12 to September 5, reversing through Virgo and this same intense zone until August 31. If you didn't slip off the grid entirely, you've probably faced the perils of tunnel vision firsthand. Mercury will spend the duration of its retrograde in Leo and your partnership sector. While this could cause wild misunderstandings with your closest colleagues or love interest, it's also an important time to iron out any disagreements and bring balance back. Take a deep breath and hear the other person out. Be willing to compromise. If you're negotiating a business deal, run things past a lawyer and if you can, wait to sign on the dotted line until Mercury resumes direct (forward) motion.

One grounding day arrives at the September 6 Pisces full moon, which illuminates your second house of work, money and security. Financial news could arrive, or you'll be inspired to dive in and create your fall budget. You could receive an exciting job offer or promotion. If you've been trying to kick a bad habit, la luna empowers you to let go of this crutch and replace it with something affirming. Have you been faithfully sticking to your budget? Treat yourself to a luxe but practical gift. This is an excellent day to pitch or sign a new client, or to hang your shingle if you're launching a new initiative.

The September 20 Virgo new moon also spotlights money, but since this is in your eighth house of shared finances, it will affect your long-term ventures more than your day-to-day earnings. A chance to invest, earn passive income or strike a real estate deal could be on the horizon. You might get serious about applying for a grant or cleaning up debt. A joint venture could bring a lucrative win-win scenario, one you'll (reminder again!) want to carefully consider rather than rush into. New moons unfold over six months’ time, providing the chance to research and get the full backstory before making any decisions.

Because this new moon will form a jarring quincunx angle to your ruler, impromptu Uranus, you might be tempted to make a nervous, knee-jerk move. With Uranus in Aries and your communication house, you could fall prey to misinformation, especially if you go snooping, Googling and gossiping. Make sure you're dealing with actual facts, not a slick sales pitch or random rumor that turns out to be a bold-faced lie (one that leaves YOU red-faced for actually believing it!).

All the intensity starts to dissipate on September 22, when the Sun lifts its chariot into fellow air-sign Libra and your expansive ninth house. Now instead of your hyperfocused state, you'll switch to a wide-angle setting and see the big picture. Viewing a situation as this broad, sweeping vista allows you to take things a LOT less personally. And with the Sun in your ninth house, you'll get super-interested in the wider world. Travel, study, launching a business venture: Grand adventures are calling your name. After stewing in the emo depths of the eighth house, you're more than ready to embrace a positive perspective where a multitude of tempting possibilities dot the landscape.

But before you go cliff-diving, restrain yourself one last time. On September 28, outspoken Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition with shock jock Uranus in your expressive third house. Jupiter and Uranus are the most freedom-loving planets, and they're battling for the win. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could resurface for a grand finale.

With these hotheaded planets in your communication sectors, an opinion you've been withholding could come out in an unexpected tirade. There could be a heated exchange with a sibling, neighbor or friend today. Before you go on a rampage, reading people the riot act or stirring up a social-media brush fire, recognize where you're about to burn a bridge. Even if you decide it's best to move on from a friendship or collaboration, you can still exit with gratitude and grace. The satisfaction of a perfect parting shot may not feel as good after a while.

Overall, this opposition is a good time to ask: How can you present your message more effectively? Whether that means convincing a partner to help with the dishes or delivering a world-changing PSA about immigration rights, craft your words with the utmost care. You SAY you want a revolution, but you might not actually need one to accomplish your aims. In fact, you could cause more chaos and cleanup by stirring the whole pot at once. If you need to have an important conversation, clear the air without bringing up every grievance you've logged since 2007. And please, keep it civil!

Another reason to be above-board? Also on September 28, shadowy Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your twelfth house of healing, spirituality and closure. Starting last April, you may have dismantled some deep subconscious blocks or struggled with forgiveness work. An old addictive pattern may have resurfaced, or perhaps some ancient fears flared up again. Vivid dreams and old memories made it hard for some Aquarians to get a good night's sleep. You may have weathered a tough transition or paused to mourn a loss that you hadn't properly grieved. If you've been working through heavy emotions—or struggling to deal—Pluto's course correction makes it easier. Disengage from losing battles and senseless struggles, Aquarius, and pour your energy into more positive pursuits. If you've been unsure of someone's true colors, Pluto helps you identify who's truly got your back.