Parenting as an expat in the Netherlands means surrounding your own children with some of the most confident, self-possessed and happy children in the world.

On good days, I feel like I’ve gifted my children with the opportunity to experience a childhood straight out of a “Leave It To Beaver” episode, where kids are free to play in the street, cycle over to their friend’s house and come home when it’s time for dinner.

On other (not-so-good) days, I feel like the uptight expat mom who is forever telling her kids to be careful on the play equipment or trying to convince them of the health benefits of rice cakes and apple slices while the Dutch kids enjoy their fluffy white bread smothered in butter and chocolate sprinkles.

It turns out that I wasn’t the only one thinking that Dutch kids were enjoying a pretty idyllic childhood. Dutch children have been found by UNICEF to be the happiest kids in the world, twice. Which means that Dutch parents can, by reflected glory, claim the mantle of world’s best parents. After all, isn’t a child’s happiness the ultimate parenting win?

These surveys not only found Dutch kids to be the happiest by UNICEF’s objective standards (education, health and material well-being), but when children were asked to rank their own happiness levels Dutch kids once again came out on top. Not only are Dutch kids doing well in life, but they also recognize just how good they have it.

Living as an expat among the Dutch for seven years, these findings came as no surprise. So what does it mean to parent alongside the Dutch: Is it a series of daily recriminations about your own shortfalls as a parent? Or is it an inspiring jolt to lift up your own parenting game?

The truth over the past seven years has been a little of both.

I may feel like I’m the only person disciplining my kids at the playground, but parenting Dutch style also means letting go—letting kids be kids, not worrying about keeping up with the Joneses (or the van der Meyers) and prioritizing time spent together as a family.

It turns out it’s not just what the Dutch do that are making their kids happy, but what they don’t do.

They aren’t materialistic

The most well-known expression that captures the Dutch approach to life is “doe maar gewoon, dan doe je al gek genoeg,” or “just act normal, that’s crazy enough.”

Everyone may own a bike (or three), but they are just as likely to be 50 Euro rust buckets (often preferred given the high likelihood that your bike will be stolen) as they are to be a 1,200 Euro bakfiets (cargo bikes ideal for carting up to five or six kids, and preferably well insured). Critics claim that the push for conformity devalues excellence and achievement, and makes those who can’t (or don’t want to) conform feel relegated to outsider status. The upside of the be-normal attitude is that those who flaunt their wealth are looked down upon and kids grow up in an environment that doesn’t confuse material possessions for success or happiness.

They don’t helicopter parent

Shorty after moving to the Netherlands, we cycled into our street after school to be met with Beyoncé blasting out of a neighbor’s stereo and kids practicing their “Single Ladies” dance moves on the three-tiered scaffolding construction workers had left behind. The parents of the strutting children were occasionally checking in on them but otherwise the kids were left unsupervised, clamoring for a spot on their improvised podium. I watched both bemused and mentally ticking off all the ways this would never be allowed to happen back home.

These Dutch kids are not being raised shrouded in cotton wool. They had started cycling alongside their parents from the age of 2 or 3 and by their tenth birthday many would be cycling solo to school and weekend sports clubs. Dutch parents clearly care about their kids’ safety, but also invest in preparing their children for the outside world rather than shielding them from it. While I was worrying, the Dutch kids were gaining a sense of achievement, independence and self-confidence.

They don’t avoid the big issues

The Dutch are well known for their liberal attitudes towards the big-ticket issues of soft drugs, prostitution and euthanasia, but don’t expect to encounter a large-scale hippy commune in the lowlands. Their liberal attitudes to these issues are in stark contrast to the regime that dictates everyday Dutch life. You may be able to buy a joint at the local coffee shop, but you should expect a hefty fine if you put your trash out before the designated time.