All Natural Homemade Blush

Thank you for supporting this site with purchases made through links in this article.

SIGN UP FOR FREE UPDATES, OFFERS, & TIPS. Plus I'll send you a free copy of "Your Simply Healthy Handbook." It's your #1 resource to make healthy living easy.

It seemed only natural to make my own homemade blush after trying my hand at mascara, lip balm, and bronzer. But I really didn’t think about doing it until someone left a comment requesting it. (See how useful your comments are!) But I really loved how this all natural homemade blush turned out. It’s perfect to “awaken” my sometimes ghostly white face.

Of course I don’t need to tell you why homemade blush is a good idea, right? Besides putting the power back in your hands, you avoid any nasty chemical toxins that may be commercial brands. Plus, like so many of my recipes, it’s easy.

Time to experiment

Keep in mind that with all makeup there is a continuum of “what works” for every individual. This is especially true when we start making things like bronzer, blush, or foundation. What works for me may not work for you. Luckily, it’s pretty easy to adjust and adapt this recipe to work with your skin tones and desired outcome.

With that in mind, you should probably know that I’m extremely pale. And I’m not a huge makeup person. Therefore, my blush of choice is light and subtle. So rather than give you an exact recipe, I’m giving you the jumping off point to find your perfect shade.

Okay, back to the homemade blush. Are you ready?

Print This!

All Natural Homemade Blush Ingredients: arrowroot powder

hibiscus powder (like this)

cinnamon (optional) Directions: Start with a base of arrowroot powder, about 1 Tbs. Add in the hibiscus powder one teaspoon at a time until you get the desired color. Add cinnamon for a little depth and glow. *Note: Hibiscus powder gives a nice subtle pink glow, but for some it may seem too subtle. You could also try Alkanet Root powder which has a richer, more reddish, tone. But in either case, add the color gradually. You can always add more arrowroot powder to lighten back up, but if you get too heavy handed you’ll end up with a whole lot of blush on your hand.

Looking for simple, frugal ways to live more naturally? I thought so.

The internet is full of natural tutorials these days. The only problem is finding the tried-and-true recipes and keeping them all organized in one place.

That’s why I created the ultimate guide to non-toxic living. My ebook, All Natural Living has 75 non-toxic recipes. You’ll find recipes for hair care, makeup, personal care products, cleaning products and more. It also walks you through the best first steps and provides insights on the must-have ingredients.

Needless to say, it’s a super handy guide to have nearby.

The DIY revolution can save you cash and keep your home super healthy. So stop wasting time and money and grab your copy right now. Click here to check it out.