Some physicians suggest that V.I.P. services are a harmless way to raise money. Wealthy patients can afford to pay over $1,000 a night for deluxe rooms. More important, if V.I.P.s have good experiences, they might make big donations. At some cancer centers, doctors are even trained to solicit donations themselves. It makes sense. With more money, the hospital can improve its overall service. It’s trickle down health care.

But are red blankets really harmless?

Regular patients lose when hospitals dedicate their best spaces to elite units. One study found that patients in a room with a view of nature recovered faster from gallbladder surgery than those who faced a brick wall. Even having a room with more sunlight has been associated with decreased patient stress and use of pain medications. The University Medical Center of Princeton built new rooms with better aesthetics and found that patients who recovered from surgery in those rooms required 30 percent less pain medication than patients in old rooms.

Hospitals that provide faster care to some emergency room patients might negatively affect others. A doctor in Connecticut surveyed the directors of 32 emergency departments around the state on whether they gave faster treatment to V.I.P.s in their emergency rooms. Most responded, and all but one supported the practice. Regular patients who are well enough wait a little longer, which prompted the doctor to call the practice “vaguely unethical but necessary.”

When I describe luxury medicine to people outside of health care, they initially worry that it might lead to inferior medical care for nonelite patients. This is understandable. At most hospitals, doctors care for several patients at once. Although I have never observed a doctor neglect someone for a red blanket patient, we lack data to properly assess.

Surprisingly, many doctors worry that V.I.P.s receive worse care. I’ve heard countless stories of elite patients who underwent unnecessary tests or were treated with medications unlikely to be helpful because the physician felt pressured to appease them.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

This can distract from optimal treatment. At least one study suggests that higher patient satisfaction is correlated with worse outcomes. When the University of Pennsylvania’s health system built a V.I.P. unit in 2007, faculty members were concerned that “similar units at other institutions provided excellent amenities but inferior nursing and patient care.”

On the record, doctors say that they treat all of their patients equally. Off the record, they reveal a range of answers. I, too, have been guilty of giving special treatment to red blanket patients.

Once, one of my patients — the head of a major local business — was ready to be discharged. As I entered his room to share the good news, I was greeted by the smell of flowers. They were in a vase on the bedside table, and I wondered if his wife or patient relations brought them.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When I told him that he would be going home, he frowned, and his wife spoke up.

“Doctor, I’d feel more comfortable if we stayed another night, just to be safe.”

Although there was no medical reason for him to stay, I smiled politely and said, “Yes, that’s absolutely fine.”

Would I have done the same if his blanket had been white?

Though some doctors find the practice to be harmless, and others may describe it as “unethical,” all seem to have deemed luxury health care necessary. Amid budget cuts, reduced reimbursements and rural hospital closures, it’s hard to argue with that sentiment.

But if we don’t challenge the necessity of luxury services, then we have accepted that hospitals — and medicine in general — prosper in part because they cater to the wealthy. This undermines the fundamental ideals of medical training.

The real harm of red blankets is in an unanswered question: When I allow one of my patients to be labeled “important,” do I implicitly label the others as less important?