Horoscopes are fun because they're all about you. But they're even more fun when they're about someone you know. I mean, don't you often know the people you love better than you know yourself?

What's more fun than reading about why your Pisces man is the perfect date? Or about why exactly you're having problems with your feisty Scorpio? If horoscopes are good for anything, it's getting a glimpse — good or bad — into the men and women we love.

Different signs attract. And if you're with someone who falls under a different one, it's good to know exactly what you're getting into (and on to). Relationships aren't always cut-and-dried, and sometimes we need a little bit of help from the dark side of the moon.

Aries: Their passion

(March 21 – April 19)

You'll be following an Aries for the rest of your life. Independent and impulsive, Aries tend to demand a life of constant movement — and they make sure you can't help but love to watch them leave.

The passion and impulsivity that they carry — even if they're just passing through — will intoxicate you (along with the drinks they're always serving). You will become a slave to their desires and ventures, trying desperately to get a seat on the ride.

But if you're welcomed aboard, it's up to you to hold on.

Taurus: Their success

(April 20 – May 20)

Is there anything sexier than a man or woman who knows how to get the job done?

Because of their perseverance, people born under Taurus tend to be leaders in any industry (and in any bed) they try to enter. They're modest about their feats, but you'll find they have plenty under their belt.

If you get with a Taurus, expect to be wined and dined. People born under Taurus tend to have excellent hosting skills and a desire to pamper the ones they love. They like to be surrounded by beautiful things, and they'll make sure you're one of them. They're all about spreading hard-earned money on top of some smooth love.

Gemini: Their wisdom

(May 21 – June 20)

If you want some tongue action, seek out a Gemini. You'll love to hear a Gemini speak. You'll crave and devour the stories of people born under Gemini. Be careful, however: For all their charm, they do tend to have sharp tongues. But they will apologize as soon as they realize you're hurt.

Their flighty nature makes them elusive and desirable. But they might leave without warning, and you'll soon realize all their tales are simply evidence of a fabulous and fleeting life. There's always that looming thought that you may soon just be another story to them.

Cancer: Their unpredictability

(June 20 – July 22)

A Cancer is best described as “predictably unpredictable.” You never know what you're going to get. People born under Cancer jump the line between independent and clingy, soft and hard, detached and wildly emotional. You might jump into a relationship with a Cancer because you're attracted to the wildness of it.

The Cancer's free-spirited nature doesn't come without a cost: their indecisiveness. A Cancer is as hard to let go as he or she is to love. You can't help but crave the consistent inconsistencies that live inside people born under Cancer. There's a reason that Tom Cruise is their leader.

Leo: Their charm

(July 23 – August 22)

A Leo is that guy at the bar who can get you home without buying you a drink first. If you've never met a Leo, be warned: He will charm the pants (and other things) off you.

People born under Leo radiate energy and warmth. They're natural magnets. Because of this, they've developed very keen dating profiles — and a bit of an ego. If this ego develops, a Leo can become addicted to the attention.

People born under Leo have a tendency to fall for praise and will seek it out if necessary. Ignoring your Leo for too long might prompt him or her to find someone else. Don't protest your Leo's departure too much, since this sign is notorious for never admitting a mistake.

Virgo: Their intelligence

(August 23- September 22)

If you're into good head game, always go after a Virgo. There's nothing sexier than a man who knows how to give good brain.

Whether in bed or the street, people born under Virgo can typically solve any problem. They'll impress you with their vast stores of knowledge and a seemingly bottomless toolkit.

They like to take problems head on, and watching them roll up their sleeves can be a huge turn on. People born under Virgo are assertive and will try to lure you into their game. They're not scared of a challenge, and they're quite loyal: They'll fight for the ones they love.

Libra: Their sensitivity

(September 23- October 22)

If you want someone to understand the depths of your soul, seek out a Libra. People born under this sign tend to be very sensitive, and they'll take the time to get to know you — even when you feel your mysteries have been plundered already. They aren't pushy or forward, so if you're looking for someone to take control, don't look to them.

This isn't to say a Libra won't be there for you when you need the support. But they will be there when you're ready to debate philosophical and emotional problems.

However, understand that people born under Libra like to make you swoon right before they leave the building. The moment you feel comfortable enough to stand up to them is often the moment they prove you wrong.

Scorpio: Their dark mysteriousness

(October 23 – November 21)

People born under Scorpio can be dark. They can burn you faster than they can charm you. They are perfect for people who seek complicated relationships full of ups and downs. Living their life of extremes is tempting because when it's good, it's really f*cking good.

Like most people with a dark side, they pull you in with their alluring force and create a tornado of emotions and drama. This can be addictive for a while, but you may find yourself scared of the very person you love.

Sagittarius: Their kindness

(November 22 – December 21)

If you're attracted to the kind and gentle nature of people, you find a Sagittarius. People born under Sagittarius will smother you with affection and love, and they won't be scared to open up to you. At the same time, a Sagittarius tends to confide in a lot of people. You'll have to get used to sharing.

Your Sagittarius partner's dark side will challenge you and keep you on your toes. If you lie to a Sagittarius, expect to see a few bridges burned. They're looking for honesty, not another one of your bullshit stories.

Capricorn: Their silence

(December 22 – January 19)

If you're looking for a Denzel Washington, you'll be drawn to a Capricorn. People born under Capricorn are stoic in nature and rigid in their beliefs. They don't open up easily, and their closed lips keep people guessing. Is there anything sexier than silence?

Like our favorite leading men, Capricorns are passionate when they're going after something they love. But on the other side of that love is a world of hate. Be careful.

Aquarius: Their quirks

(January 20 – February 18)

People born under Aquarius are charmers without realizing it. They aren't necessarily suave or smooth; in fact, they're usually the opposite. They tend to wish they were different, but they're their most beautiful when they're not trying to be anything at all.

Their little mannerisms, minor habits and unique ways of being entrance you. They have a different way of looking at life and the people they love.

Pisces: Their flexibility

(February 19 – March 20)

Whether it be with plans or between the sheets, Pisces lovers are flexible. They're known for being deeply emotional, if not naive. But don't confuse their naiveté for innocence. They have old souls, and their wisdom is not be to overlooked, however, if they're threatened, they will attack.

Though they have no problem hanging behind-the-scenes, they will not let people walk all over them. They're down to follow you, but they won't ever let you step on them.

For more Elite Daily original videos, subscribe to the official Elite Daily YouTube Channel and like the official Elite Daily Facebook Page.