Mommy Makeover Surgery in St Clair Shores Michigan

Women are truly remarkable – especially when it comes to being a mother. To many women, however, the changes to their bodies can be significant and even devastating. Their breasts enlarge, stretching the skin and areola and the tummys often end up with permanent stretch marks and loose skin, not to mention the laxity in the abdominal muscles. To make matters worse, no amount of diet or exercise will ever make things better.

Thank goodness for plastic surgery and the Mommy Makeover! Restoration of a damaged figure can be a reality with the many surgical procedures that are available. Implants and fat transfer can be used to enlarge your cup size and short scar mastopexy techniques can restore that droopy breast to a more youthful appearance. To obtain the most dramatic outcome, a tummy tuck or abdominoplasty, often combined with liposuction, can shape and contour your figure possibly even better than it was before your pregnancy!

Dr Kayser is proud to celebrate 20 years of providing excellence in plastic and cosmetic surgery and, as a board certified plastic surgeon, you can be assured that he will provide you with a commitment to the best that plastic surgery has to offer! Call the office now for a mommy makeover in Michigan at 586-776-3223 to speak with any one of our very special staff and schedule your consultation today. I look forward to meeting you soon!

Procedures Involved in Mommy Makeover Surgery

All of us want to look as attractive as possible. These days, there are many choices available for people to do just that. If you have chosen to have cosmetic surgery, consider the following tips in order to make your experience a positive one.

Make sure you do a little research on cosmetic surgery before you go under the knife. You are going to want to understand all that is involved with cosmetic surgery like costs, risks, and how you should prepare for the actual surgery. After a little research you can determine if cosmetic surgery is for you or not.

If you have heard that someone else is getting plastic surgery, don’t allow that to sway your opinion of yourself. While there are many great times to use this tool, keeping up with the Jones’ is not a good enough reason. Give yourself some time to think, then reconsider the idea later on.

Almost all types of plastic surgery require some type of anesthesia. Remember, there is not one type of anesthesia that works in all cases, so be sure to talk to your doctor about the potential benefits and drawbacks of your various options. Many times, general anesthesia will be required for larger surgeries.

Prior to getting cosmetic surgery, be aware that there may be complications from the procedure. Your plastic surgeon will more than likely go over these potential complications with you. It is important for you to be aware of them. Some of the complications may include infection, swelling, increased blood pressure, and although rare, even death.

During your pre-surgery consultation with your cosmetic surgeon, you will want to discuss anesthesia. It is important to know that a qualified anesthetist will be administering your anesthesia, and monitoring your health during the procedure. You will also want to discuss the various anesthesia options that are available to you.

Plastic Surgery

Cosmetic surgery can be used for a variety of reasons, so it is important to understand what type of surgery you are undergoing. The difference between general plastic surgery and reconstructive surgery is vast and there are different procedures regarding each of these two different types. Make sure to get the correct information.

When looking at any type of surgery, you should always be prepared for problems. This is even more true with plastic surgery, as you also have the chance of a botched job. This isn’t meant to scare you off, just as a reminder to have the number of a back-up surgeon on hand.

Even though you could save money by going out of country for your surgery, it is better to choose a surgeon near your home. If you have complications, it is difficult to get them fixed in a foreign country.

Breast Augmentation

Learn of what preparations you will need to take for surgery after-care. Certain cosmetic surgeries, such as breast augmentation, require you to take medications, or creams after you have the procedure. It is wise to learn about after-care before surgery. The last thing you want to have to do after the procedure, is run out to get the products.

Undergoing a cosmetic surgery procedure does not guarantee that you will end up with perfect results. Breast augmentation is fraught with imperfections. Although your surgeon can easily increase your breast size, the sizing may not be symmetrical. Some patients can see and feel the breast implant through their skin after the procedure.

Once of things that can go wrong during a breast augmentation is that you could have breast cancer and not have known. Self-examination is one of the most important ways of detecting cancer, but breast augmentation can conceal the signs of breast cancer normally detected by self-exams. Implants can make it harder to examine yourself. Also, when the body is healing, scar tissue is formed in the breasts, also making it difficult to find breast lumps.

Breast Lift

If your breasts are drooping because of age and childbirth, a breast lift might be for you. A subtle breast lift can give your bust line that firm and perky appearance of youth. This is a great way to take years off of your appearance with a simple procedure.

Tummy Tuck

You should consider the following when you are considering a tummy tuck. To be a good candidate for this type of procedure, you should be close to optimum body weight. You might have some loose skin around the belly area caused by pregnancy, or rapid weight loss. A cosmetic surgeon will want you to be at your ideal weight, in order to have a successful procedure.