Advertisement

Ever since the proliferation of services like Blogger (formerly Blogspot) and WordPress in the mid-2000’s, blogging has grown to become one of the largest corners of the Internet. Recently, this corner has been dubbed the blogosphere. And guess what makes up a big portion of this so-called blogosphere? Fashion blogs!

Listen up, men. A lot of you may think that fashion is only for two types of people – women and metrosexuals. If that’s how you think, I truly hope you’ll change your stance because dressing well has many benefits. At the very least, it can do a lot to boost your confidence and improve the first impression you make on others.

One of my favorite anti-jokes 55 Geeky One Line Jokes 55 Geeky One Line Jokes Read More also happens to hold a lot of weight here:

Q: What do you call a man who dresses well? A: Grown up.

So if you’re looking to kick your outfits up a notch and transform your juvenile appearance into one of confidence and pizazz, then you ought to check out these blogs. They’ll do the job and they’ll do it quick.

Valet

Valet is one of the quintessential style blogs for men. It covers a lot of ground – from trends to product reviews to fashion show coverage to style how-to articles – and it covers that ground with skill and care.

Advertisement

One of my favorite things about Valet is that their articles are full-length, so you get a lot of content. On top of that, they update on a daily basis, so you’ll always have something new to learn about keeping yourself stylish.

Fashion Beans

Fashion Beans is a men’s style blog from the UK and it’s one of the best ones out there. If you’re interested in trends and collections related to men’s fashion, this is the place you want to go.

But it doesn’t end there. For the man who is still learning what it means to be stylish, Fashion Beans is one of my recommended resources. They have an incredibly helpful series called Men’s Fashion Basics that aims to teach everything there is to know about male style sense.

In addition to style tips, Fashion Beans covers personal grooming, hair care, and has an active forum community for discussion and debate.

Primer Magazine

Primer Magazine is the resource you want to go to if you’re a male in your early twenties. After all, the slogan for Primer is “A Guy’s Post-College Guide to Growing Up” and it surely delivers on that promise.

Yes, Primer does teach a lot about dressing well and how to outfit yourself for certain situations. However, the best thing about Primer is its targeted audience: the college graduate who is entering into the real world.

You don’t know how to order wine at a restaurant? Do you want to get your life together? Are you having trouble with romantic relationships? Are you unsure how to deal with that co-worker problem at work? Primer has got your back with all of these things.

The Effortless Gent

As the name implies, the Effortless Gent is a blog that emphasizes classic and timeless ensembles that don’t require loads of cash and time. This blog posts on a regular basis, offering tips, advice, and ideas on how to upgrade yourself from a boy or a man into a gentleman – the kind of gentleman that everyone admires and respects.

Forget about the peacocks who try too hard in impressing others. The Effortless Gent will help you become a better man without all the effort you think it requires.

Dappered

While a lot of the blogs listed in this article are multi-focused (they cover other topics related to men’s style), Dappered has a specific focus: improving your sense of style while staying affordable.

Some articles grant lots of fashion advice. Other articles give overviews of the past week’s sales, deals, and awesome finds. A few posts are discussion-based, asking readers whether or not they’d wear this or buy that – a great way to partake in the community and learn from others, for sure.

It’s all great fun and, in the end, you’ll learn how to be a better man while staying on a budget.

Put This On

The tagline for Put This On? A web series about dressing like a grown up.

This blog not only teaches you fashion basics – like all you need to know about ties, how to dress for a job interview, and a list of wardrobe essentials for every man – but they’ll also notify you when quality brands go on sale.

The best part? Put This On has a sprawling archive of great content that you can revisit at any time. Even if you’re late to the fashion game, you can go through all of those informative posts and become an expert in no time.

Stay Classic

Who says you need a lot of money to look good? Stay Classic shows you how to look spiffy while keeping a fat wallet.

This blog is run by a chill guy from Los Angeles and all he wants to do is show you how you can dress nicely in an inexpensive way. Most of his outfits are pieced together with clothing from lower end retailers, like H&M, Old Navy, Levi’s, and even Forever 21 (the men’s line).

If you want to see how it’s done, let Stay Classic show you how to stay classic without breaking the bank.

Do you visit any men’s fashion blogs on a regular basis? If you think there’s a great blog that we’ve missed, share it with us in the comments!