Fanny Marchevsky was flying from Charleston, South Carolina to Chicago to San Francisco to Bakersfield on United after celebrations for her 80th birthday. Far from an inexperienced flying the former professor and Microsoft employee is a United Million Miler. But she only made it to Chicago.

Tunnel Connecting United’s B and C concourses at Chicago O’Hare

She wound up bloodied and in the hospital, didn’t know where she was and a lawsuit alleges United left her without notifying the emergency contact in her reservation.

On the Charleston – Chicago United Express leg another passenger opened the overhead bin above her seat and a bag fell out on top of her.

She “got dizzy” but on arrival in Chicago a flight attendant “walked her through the jet bridge and sat her down in the terminal” rather than “calling paramedics or using a wheelchair to take her off the plane.”

She received “little attention” over the next 45 minutes before her connecting flight was set to board. She couldn’t board, and was sent to an emergency room. “I was scared,” she said in an affidavit supporting her lawsuit. “I was injured and all alone in a city far from any family.”

Her family tracked her down when a friend set to meet her at her arrival gate in San Francisco and take her to her connecting flight to Bakersfield discovered she wasn’t on the inbound aircraft.

Her son “flew to Chicago and found his mother in an emergency room. She was bruised and had blood on her clothes.” “My mother’s crying,” Otman recalled. “She doesn’t know where she is.”

United’s lawyers “acknowledged that its employees never informed Otman, Marchevsky’s emergency contact for the flight, of her predicament.” However they argue that United’s “conduct was not atrocious or intolerable” and that they haven’t “committed any wrongful act.”

This happened one year before United unveiled new measures to prevent poor customer treatment following the David Dao incident.

She has since moved to Charleston, and flew Delta to get there.

Lawsuit aside, this story raises a couple of questions for me.

When an incident happens onboard a regional affiliate of a major airline, how much responsibility does the major airline bear? It’s their brand, their ticket, often their aircraft, we usually think of the major airline as responsible for their conduct regardless of who formally pays the employees.

It’s their brand, their ticket, often their aircraft, we usually think of the major airline as responsible for their conduct regardless of who formally pays the employees. How much care does an airline owe its passengers? Aside from unaccompanied minors where the airline explicitly takes responsibility, does the airline owe a duty to care for someone from departure to arrival or are they more on their own? We frequently look to an airline to feed us and provide us lodging during delays, though they get an ‘out’ frequently for weather-related events where it’s not their fault. What about where an incident is caused by another passenger and not the airline itself?

United employees do enough to harm passengers without holding them responsible for the actions of other passengers.

I’m not sure they ought to be held legally liable here, although I’d like to think they’d care enough to ensure not just that an 80 year old woman receives care but that her family is notified where she is as well.