The Gemini Man

The Gemini Man: Love, Sex, Friendship, Style

The Gemini Man

The Gemini man is a wordsmith and a master of communication. It’s not all idle chatter, or conversations about the weather with this man. He is an intellectual, always seeking more information and knowledge. Bright, quick-witted, and mercurial, the Gemini man is many things but he is never boring.

Symbolized by the Twins, a Gemini is both Master Jekyll and Mister Hyde, a mix of suave gentleman and salt-of-the-earth. The Gemini man can see both sides of any issue, and possesses an extremely balanced opinion on topics ranging from the mundane to the controversial.

You will often hear a Gemini man wax lyrical about the benefits of, say, yoga, and then stop to catch his breath and continue, “On the other hand…” He isn’t being flaky. It’s just that marvelous ability of his to weigh up all the pros and cons of any situation coming into play. This other side of the coin approach also means that the Gemini man often finds it hard to make up his mind. His mood can change on a simple whim. However, this also means he is extremely flexible and is happy to go with the flow.

The Gemini man is a jack of all trades, his intelligent mind bounding from project to project, and darting from one hobby to the next in a short space of time. He will have many interests, for example; gardening, reading, rocket science, telepathy, ancient history. Everything fascinates him and he is ever curious. He loves problem solving and approaches challenges like a game, applying his cool logic to reason himself out of hairy situations.

A social sign, the Gemini man is most comfortable in social situations, holding forth on a variety of topics, ideas, and opinions. Gemini men love interesting company and are fascinated by the different and the exotic. Charming and congenial, the Gemini man is popular and effusive with his friends. Many celebrity Twins are authors or songwriters, for example, Bob Dylan and Paul McCartney. Other famous Geminis include Donald Trump, John F. Kennedy, and Johnny Depp.

Love, Sex, Romance, and Relationships with a Gemini Man

Charming, flirty, and irresistible, he has incredibly high standards and may throw up a smoke screen or act unpredictably to hide his deepest emotions. The intellectual Twin is not always comfortable with the great passions that lie within him which are unleashed when he falls in love. For this reason, the Gemini man does not fall in love easily or often. Thoughts, not emotions, influence him the most, so get him talking about his opinions. He is a fun loving and roguish lover, with bold romantic gestures. Don’t read too much into them, though, because for a Gemini, this is just normal behavior. Game, set, and match – love is sometimes pure diversion for the Gemini man.

In relationships, Gemini men will often exasperate their partners with their objective reasoning in arguments. He isn’t being cold and unemotional; he’s just trying to be logical about it all. Luckily, because he is so good at communicating his thoughts and listening to his partner, arguments don’t happen often. Routine is anathema to the Gemini man, so the biggest threat to a relationship with a Gemini is boredom. His partner will have to keep up with his mental gymnastics or risk losing his attention. The perfect partner for a Gemini man is one who is practical, stable and won’t mind his madcap fancies. A partner must also be extremely intelligent and secure enough to provide him with plenty of space to roam.

Playful in the bedroom, sex is an adventure for the Gemini man. He wants to try new things, new toys, and new positions. Like all the other signs ruled by Air, the way to a Gemini man’s libido is through his mind. Mental games, rapid-fire riposte, sexual banter – all these things turn him on more than satin lingerie or candlelight ever will. His is a cerebral kind of sexuality, and he will use all the information at his disposal to please his partner satisfactorily in bed. The Gemini man is a generous lover, and seldom possessive or jealous.

He is generally considered most compatible with Libra, Aquarius, Leo, and Aries. See also Sun sign compatibility. However, there is a lot more to compatibility than only the comparison of the Sun signs. For example, how do your Venus signs compare? Find out Venus signs here. Discover Venus sign compatibility here.

Understanding Gemini Men

With his smooth talking ways, the Gemini man is a natural charmer who has no difficulty making friends. This intellectual man can adapt quickly to a constantly changing world and accepts whatever challenges are put before him in a calm, positive manner.

Although he’s usually in control of his emotions, the Gemini man is always in conflict with the restless “twins” which can cause him to be alluring one minute and very reserved the next.

This quick-witted individual enjoys a feisty debate and is a difficult person to argue with.

Money & the Gemini Man

The Gemini man watches his financial position closely and it’s quite normal to find him balancing his personal budget on a regular basis. It would be rare to find this man surprised with having insufficient funds in his account to cover a cheque he issued.

His portfolio will be based on logic and not emotion, so it will consist mainly of stable investments and a defined plan for long term security.

Fashion & the Gemini Man

The Gemini’s color is yellow, so you can count on this man’s wardrobe being anything but drab. There will be a variety of styles in his wardrobe, but the clothing is all in the latest fashion. Regardless of the occasion, the Gemini man will always have something suitable to wear.

Jewelry will be classy and not garish, just like his vehicle. His home and work environments will be kept neatly organized with everything having its place.

It’s not out of character for the Gemini man to spend an afternoon shopping for something and then leave the mall without making a purchase because he decided it’s really too much money to spend right now.

Relationships & the Gemini Man

The Gemini man’s innate charm makes him quite popular and he is never lacking for party invitations. Being a good listener and possessing sound judgment, friends will often call on him for advice.

He can sometimes be logical to the point of being irritating, but his rationalization of an argument does allow him to see both sides.

Romance & the Gemini Man

The adventurous Gemini man enjoys variety and constant stimulation which means that his bedroom behavior will keep a partner continually surprised and always pleased. More often than not, he will put his companion’s satisfaction before his own and this unselfish trait makes him an ideal lover.

This gentleman is a flirtatious one and enjoys the romantic side of dating and new connections. Although he may find it difficult to remain with a single partner, once he finds that special someone he becomes totally devoted to the relationship.

Health & the Gemini Man

Bronchitis and asthma are common ailments of the Gemini man, so you’ll not normally see him smoking or working in dust-laden situations. Being an active individual, this man takes care of his physique and prides himself on broad shoulders and muscular arms.

The Gemini man tends to be a bit high-strung, so he does need his rest and shouldn’t make a regular habit of coffee, caffeinated drinks and the junk food he likes so much.

Career & the Gemini Man

The Gemini man is an excellent communicator and multi-tasks well, but does require a constant challenge in his workload or boredom will affect his performance.

Confident and logical, this gentleman will find success as a lawyer, journalist, teacher, counselor, or broadcaster.

With his charismatic personality and gift for gab, politics, or high-profile sales offer tremendous career opportunity for the Gemini man.

See Also:

Gemini Horoscopes:

Gemini Daily Horoscope

Gemini Monthly Horoscope

Gemini Yearly Horoscope

Gemini Yearly Love Horoscope

Gemini Ascendant Daily Horoscope

Gemini Good Days Calendar

Future Forecast Report

2017 Preview Gemini Horoscope

All About Gemini

Gemini Ascendant

Gemini Compatibility:



Gemini Sun Sign Compatibility

Gemini Moon Sign Compatibility

Gemini Venus Sign Compatibility

Get the full scoop with a Love Styles: About Him Report. The report averages 25 pages long, and it’s all about a woman’s styles in love, in relationship, and in bed.

Don’t know the positions of your planets? Be sure to find out your personal astrology data online, at no cost.

Explore your relationship dynamics with a lover, partner, or love interest with a COMPATIBILITY REPORT.

See our Synastry article for more advanced relationship analysis techniques.

Intermediate and advanced students of Astrology might enjoy our article, SoulMate Astrology.

Determine the positions of Venus and Mars by sign and learn the sexual secrets of your partner, and yourself!

If you don’t know the positions of Venus and Mars, refer to these tables:

Venus Sign Table

Mars Sign Table

OR click here to find the positions of all your planets.