Every month ImagineFX magazine is inundated with queries from digital artists looking for advice on specific problems they're having with their drawing and painting projects.

ImagineFX has a wealth of professionals on hand to answer those questions, provide tips on how to improve your drawing, and tutorials for those learning how to draw and paint. They'll even come to the aid of fellow pro artists who have become frustrated by a specific technique.

Here is a collection of those digital painting and drawing tips and tutorials, gathered together in one mammoth feature to help you improve your artwork. Most of the articles are Photoshop tutorials unless otherwise stated, but the tips apply to other photo editor applications, whatever software or hardware you're using – and some will even be of use to you if you're a traditional artist. Happy drawing!

Here's what's included in our mega list:

How to paint faces and figures

Learn how focusing on action and some core visual tools are key to creating expressive anatomy.

We run through a pro's portraiture process in Painter 2017, the latest version of Corel's natural media art software.

Paco Rico Torres explains how to master painting the windows to the soul in your digital artwork.

Nadia Enis reveals how to understand faces and master the basics of creating a veristic visage.

Create picture-perfect skin with this easy Photoshop trick.

Paco Rico Torres issues his best advice on how to create realistic, sexy lips.

Artist Daniela Uhlig runs through correct shadow placement to give your character a 3D appearance.

Illustrator Mélanie Delon reveals how to master the art of painting beautifully realistic hair, digitally.

Top comic book artist Frazer Irving shares his top tips on capturing a truly terrified screeching face.

Use subtle details to enhance your fantasy character designs. David Gaillet shows you how it's done with his punk rock mutant.

Digital artist Cynthia Sheppard reveals how she combines images to create animen.

McLean Kendree varies the shape and size of features to create three different characters from one reference.

Hands are one of the most difficult parts of the body to draw. Naiha Raza's video and tips show you how.

Nick Harris reveals his top tips for creating a convincing character cowering with terror.

Learn how to create this with Remko's expert tutorial: Watch the video or scroll down for a step-by-step guide

Remko Troost's tips for creating video game characters from the fabulous, taste-free world of the '80s.

"If you imagine the armour as a collection of bent mirrors attached to each other, you'll have a good starting point," says Tony Foti, in this top tutorial.

Digital artist Sara Forlenza explains how to tackle this tricky bit of anatomical painting.

Illustrator John Petersen explains how to create viscous-looking snot using Photoshop.

Distort and stretch, but know when and when not to add exaggeration, with artist Paco Rico Torres.

Artist John Watkiss breaks down compositional and anatomical techniques to accurately illustrate the classic fantasy character Tarzan.

Design your very own celtic-inspired fantasy tattoo with this easy step-by-step guide from expert Tony Foti.

"There are many ways to approach a living tattoo. The secret is nailing that shift from tattoo to living entity," says artist Lauren Cannon.

Next page: Composition and scenes