But to return to the big problem: Why do we feel compelled to hide having cosmetic surgery, sneaking around as if we were unwed mothers in the 1950s, with clandestine conversations about doctors and extended stays out of sight or out of town?

O.K., the first few days after surgery one may not be looking one’s best. I, in addition to the Steri-Strips across my nose, had bristly, black sutures under my chin and nose. That’s a look you don’t want for your OkCupid meeting.

But had I been in an accident, such as the one I anticipate this summer when a scooter maniac crashes into me, would I feel the need to lie about it or hide?

I would not. I would tell you the gripping medical details of my facial reconstruction, and you would look at me and my whiskery black sutures with compassion and respect.

The Steri-Strips and nose and chin sutures, by the way, came off after four days. That meant all I had to hide were the yellow-green bruising on my neck and the purple-blue bruising below it. I went to a party for my beloved hangout, the Knickerbocker, with a scarf so high on my face I ate some as a first course. Heaven forbid someone figured out I had just had surgery to look better.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

This makes no sense. People in this country yap loudly on their cells about the kind of sex they’ve had. They have affairs and put photos up on Facebook, where their husbands or wives can find them. They refuse to stand up and let other people get past their seats at the movies. They work in customer support for Verizon.

I just wanted to get rid of my jowls and chicken neck.

Believe me, I was suffering terribly.

I couldn’t pass the mirror in front of my elevator without doing the face-skin pull — a nerve-racking move because you never know when the elevator door will open and you have to pretend to be doing something socially acceptable, like squeezing a pimple.

I’d pull a V-neck dress out of the closet and realize I could not wear it because nature and genetics had conspired to give me the neck of a 69-year-old, which, coincidentally, is the age on my passport.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Had I been alive 140 years ago, I would have had no choice but to live with a saggy neck. Back then, there wasn’t even decent hair color. My hair would have had to remain its natural — honestly, I can’t remember. I would have been dead three times of cancer, which, by the way, is the reason for my previous cosmetic surgery, my exquisitely reconstructed breasts.

(Bionic warrior women, join me in a shout-out: Dr. Joseph J. Disa, Memorial Sloan Kettering, hoo-rah!!)

Does anyone think less of me because I had breast reconstruction? Absolutely not. Cancer protects you from criticism, not merely for cosmetic surgery, for everything. Plaid drapes? Love them!

But silly me, here I am going on about my cosmetic surgery, and I have left out exactly what I had done: cheek/neck face-lift, tip-plasty, upper eyelid trim and fat grafting to face. Surgeon: Dr. Charles H. Thorne, 812 Park Avenue. Surgical costs, including operating room, anesthesia, and pre- and post-surgical photographs: $31,483.

But promise me — tell no one.