Work isn’t working; that much seems clear. If you’re a human being with a job and you don’t feel unpleasantly busy yourself, you almost certainly know several people who do, and who rarely stop mentioning it. The feeling of busyness seems ambient, in the air, even infectious – wafting from your colleagues’ hurried email signoffs (“rgds”), or from the tense frowns of coffee shop customers whose cappuccinos aren’t coming quickly enough. Things that never previously triggered stress now do so: a chirping smartphone at 9.45pm starts the anxiety juices flowing, even if it turns out to herald a message from a beloved friend. We’re urged to take time off, relax, get enough sleep – but somehow the result is to turn rest and recreation into further items on the to-do list, silently reproaching us for not yet being crossed off.

And yet it’s been obvious for a while now that the busyness epidemic isn’t what it seems. Data reliably shows we have more leisure time than in the past, not less. (Even parents of small children spend more time per day, on average, in leisure activities than primary childcare.) Last year, a survey of thousands of adults in 28 countries found that most of us don’t believe how busy others claim to be, and that we frequently feel pressured to exaggerate our own busyness: we perform being overwhelmed, scared we’ll seem like slackers if we don’t – and soon we’ve convinced ourselves, too. All of which isn’t to say that the epidemic is imaginary – we really do feel too busy, after all – but that the real problem is the feeling, not the sheer number of things on our plates.

But what causes that feeling, then, if it isn’t simply having too much to do? The answer is that the sense of overwhelm arises from a mismatch – between all the things you’d like to do, or feel you ought to do, and the far smaller quantity of things you’re actually capable of doing. And the gap is widening fast.

Our human limitations – our finite energy and need for sleep, the number of hours in a day – remain the same as ever. Yet for reasons both technological and economic, the pressure to do more keeps ratcheting up. Work has burst the dams that used to contain it: a message from the office can reach you in bed at midnight if you let it; and there’s no upper limit to the number of emails you can receive, the number of new initiatives your boss can dream up, or the size to which your company might theoretically grow. Being too busy, in short, isn’t a sign of your inadequacy but a mathematical certainty: finite people, attempting to do an infinite amount, will always feel overstretched by definition. We probably need a revolution – but in the meantime, once you’ve seen the problem for what it is, there are ways you can make life more sane:

Accept defeat

“There are no solutions; there are only trade-offs,” said the economist Thomas Sowell – meaning that with resources such as time or money, spending some of it on one thing always entails not spending it on something else. It’s literally impossible to get everything done – time is limited; “everything” isn’t – and that’s great news, because it means you needn’t feel guilty for failing. You can turn, instead, on the far more manageable question of which things to deliberately neglect. The vacuuming? The weekly meeting that nobody cares about anyway? Start from the assumption that something’s got to give, and focus on figuring out what.

Respect your rhythms

If you want more output from a machine or a computer, you just run it for more hours, and it’s tempting to assume that humans are the same. But in fact, we’re creatures of rhythm: two hours of intense work, when you’re at your most focused and refreshed, can be vastly more worthwhile than six when you’re feeling depleted. If you have the flexibility, organise your day so that the most important matters get your best time, not necessarily the most time.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Balance time debts with time assets. Photograph: Bloomberg via Getty Images

Practise ‘strategic incompetence’

In office jobs, there’s one foolproof way to avoid being burdened with certain time-consuming tasks: develop a reputation for being rubbish at them. Act baffled and panicked around the coffee machine, or a jammed printer, and you’ll soon find nobody asks you to deal with it next time around. There’s a broader (and less passive-aggressive) point here, about managing expectations in general: they’re what we’re judged by – so setting them too high is a recipe for being too busy.

Build in buffers

Hofstadter’s Law, coined by the cognitive scientist Douglas Hofstadter, states that things always take longer than you think – “even when you take into account Hofstadter’s Law”. (In other words: you just will underestimate how much time a task requires, even when you know that’s what you always do and try to plan accordingly.) The best antidote, if possible, is regularly scheduled blocks of hours, designated as buffer zones. When it comes to planning your work or arranging meetings, treat them as if they didn’t exist. Then, when they roll around, use them to finish whatever you’re behind on.

Beware ‘precrastination’

A uniquely tricksy cause of busyness is the opposite of procrastination – not leaving them too late, but doing them too early, just to have them done with, even though waiting might have meant less effort overall. That’s how you end up wasting a whole day on trivialities, in search of that satisfying sensation of having cleared the decks – when all the while, more important stuff is mounting up. The secret truth, especially applicable to email, is that neglecting something for a few days often makes it go away entirely: people find alternative solutions to their problems.

Workshop this: touch base with Tim Dowling's office buzzword quiz Read more

Give your time away

When you’re rushed, it seems sensible to hoard your minutes, safeguarding as many of them as possible. Yet research on the experience of time suggests we’ve got things back-to-front: a better way to gain a sense of “time abundance” is to give some away, for example through volunteering. The explanation for this curious effect, researchers speculate, may be the feelings of self-efficacy engendered by the voluntary work: successfully do something useful, and you’ll be subconsciously reassured of your capabilities, making you more confident about the chances of getting further useful things done in future.

Watch out for time debts

Time debt, as the computer programmer Patrick McKenzie describes it, is what accrues whenever you do work that feels productive, but that in reality has the effect of generating more work, later on. This is why clearing your inbox is often a false victory: eliminating all those emails means replying to lots of them, thereby generating replies to your replies, and thus more email in the long run. (It’s the same with meetings: arranging a meeting feels like you’re dealing with a problem – but eventually you’ll have to attend the damn meeting.) You can’t eliminate this kind of work entirely. But you can try to balance it with “time assets”, work that reduces the need for further work down the line.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Experiment with doing nothing at all for 10 minutes. Photograph: Alamy

Slow down, however wrong that feels

The last thing you want to hear, when you’re drowning in to-dos, is that cultivating patience might be part of the solution. But our urgency-addicted culture is at the core of the busyness problem, according to the addiction researcher Stephanie Brown. We’re convinced that with just a bit more speed we could stay in control – and so we grow unwilling to tolerate the discomfort of slowing down. When you’re already on this urgency treadmill, it can feel excruciating to attempt to slow down – but you may end up getting more done if you try. Experiment with doing nothing at all for 10 minutes between tasks: the harder that feels, the more you may need it.

Try the five-item to-do list

One major problem with your endlessly expanding to-do list is that it fuels the fantasy of one day getting it all finished; adding one more item to the list feels effortless, so it’s dangerously easy to overcommit. The productivity coach Mark Forster proposes a radical alternative: instead of an open-ended list, use one capped at just five items, so you’re forced to complete (or consciously abandon) a task before adding another. The obvious objection to this is the risk that you’ll forget something important if you’re not allowed to write it down. But let’s be honest: you already forget important things anyway.

Stop busy-bragging

Moaning about how busy you are is “pretty obviously a boast disguised as a complaint,” in the words of the essayist Tim Kreider: “Your life cannot possibly be silly or trivial or meaningless if you are so busy, completely booked, in demand every hour of the day.” But the truth is that all that boasting probably makes you feel even busier, because we believe the things we tell ourselves, while making others feel rushed, too. (“Empathic stress” is the technical term: anxiety is contagious.) And if you insist that, no, you’re genuinely that busy… well, are you sure you can spare the time to be griping about it?

• To read more articles like this, get your copy of Weekend magazine, free this Saturday with the Guardian. Click here for £1 off the newspaper