Finding window treatments that protect your privacy or shade you from glaring sun can be one of the most tedious and joyless of all decorating tasks. But it doesn’t have to be. First of all, there is no law stating that you have to cover your windows. But if your view is less than enchanting or you just need privacy, there are options beyond curtains or dull blinds. Here are 19 creative ideas for dressing your windows that are anything but ordinary.

1. Frame It: If you can get away with no covering at all, you can still dress up the window with a bold burst of color. (via Elle Decoration)

2. Make A Reflection: Maybe you don’t have a lot of wall space, or maybe you just never want to open your bathroom blinds because of the proximity to neighbors. Hanging mirrors in front of the window is a unique use of space. More importantly, it will give you the best light for doing your makeup! (via Maddux Creative)

3. Let The Light In: Without completely blocking the view, this simple treatment will make doing the dishes a much more cheerful affair. (via At Home on The Bay)

4. Door Frames: Get the shabby chic cottage feel with these DIY wooden gate window covers. (via Funky Junk Interiors)

5. Bedazzle With Beads: Creating a dreamy coastal atmosphere, this beaded curtain is perfect where privacy isn’t needed. (via Houzz)

6. Eclectic Pieces: Love finding flea market treasures, but never know what to do with them? Why not hang it above the window as a valance like this swirly piece of wood? (via Houzz)

7. Screen Out: Providing shade, privacy and gorgeous shadows, these screens give you the best of all worlds. (via Delia Shades)

8. Royal Treatment: Instead of putting curtains around each little window, create a sweet canopy that doubles as curtains by hanging two extra-long swaths of fabric from a bed crown instead of a rod. (via Country Living)

9. Lacy Patches: Colorful and feminine, this would be pretty easy to make with thrift store lace doilies and some dye. (via Hupsistarallaa)

10. Loopy Circles: Wouldn’t this be cute in a playroom or nursery? (via Unikatissima)

11. Statement Blinds: Well, if you insist, dear kitchen. (via The Well Appointed Home)

12. Cutout Spaces: These aren’t your grandmother’s shutters! We love the little peekaboo effect of the cutout pieces. (via Chaikhona)

13. Metal Screens: Jet-cut metal screens cast amazing shadows all over the walls and floor. (via Houzz)

14. Sculptural Screening: An algae-inspired sculpture hangs in front of a window wall, adding interest and texture to this bright loft space. (via Houzz)

15. Frosted Glass: While traditionally seen in bathroom, frosted glass panels can add a really nice diffused light to your space, and it offers complete privacy without cutting off the light. (via Cowhide Rugs)

16. Adhesive Film: A little like a decal, this adhesive is available in a range of contemporary patterns, goes on with water and can be removed easily for renters or the fickle of heart. (via Emma Jeffs)

17. On The Map: Perfect for the armchair traveler, plot your next trip from the comfort of your living room chair! (via Surface View)

18. Pom Pom Garland: We love the playfulness of the simple garland and the coverage the tall plants offer. (via Lillian Day)

19. Vertical Garden: We love anything that is a two-in-one and if they happen to look good doing it, that’s even better. How awesome is this curtain and vertical garden in one?! (via Brit + Co)

Are you inspired to throw out those old curtains? Let us know in the comments below!