Cats are great, and one of the greatest things about them is that they poop indoors. They practically toilet train themselves! But also, one of the worst things about them is that they poop indoors. And you, as their human, are stuck with the dilemma of where to put the cat toilet. So we've rounded up a few DIY solutions.

And these DIYs serve other purposes besides just hiding something that might be a bit of an eyesore: Concealing the litter box will give your kitty a little extra privacy, cut down on litter-tracking and smells, and (if you have a dog) prevent all those cat dropping from becoming the world's most disgusting snack.

Dana from House Tweaking hid her cat's litter box by cutting a hole in the side of an IKEA PAX wardrobe and adding a kitty door to it. Since the entrance to the litter box is located under a bench, with the wardrobe doors closed you almost wouldn't know it's there.

In a Tel Aviv apartment spotted on Xnet, the litter box hides between the washer and dryer, accessible by a cutout in the cabinet door.

Over at IKEA Hackers, Cristina made a an elegant (can you call a litter box elegant?), modern litter box cabinet from an IKEA wall unit. The front flips down for easy scooping.

From the DIY Network, another custom litter box cabinet. The little anteroom, with the carpet floor, helps to reduce tracking.

From user pinkanddinky on Crafster, here's a clever idea for a bathroom with a wall-mounted sink: Use a skirt to conceal the litter box beneath the sink.

Here's another litter box hidden inside an IKEA cabinet, from Bella Pop. This one does double duty as an end table.

From Instructables comes this very involved but very neat litter box project — a self ventillating litter box concealed inside a built-in drawer in a bathroom.

If you prefer to keep the litter box in your laundry room but want to leave the door shut (either for aesthetics or to keep those dogs out), there's the Cathole, a kitty door that you can add to an existing interior door to give your cat acccess to the space even when the door is closed. It's available from Amazon for $31.99. Marti from Project Palermo installed hers in a closet door — you can check out plenty of photos of that setup here.

- Re-edited from a post originally published 7.01.2016 - AL