"Decorating for the holidays" often feels like an expensive and time-consuming undertaking, but there's another way to do Christmas: embracing the Danish concept of hygge (simple, cozy and comforting). Often nature-inspired and monochrome in look, check out these ideas for a Scandi-inspired, minimal holiday at home.

Above: A clever DIY advent calendar via My Scandinavian Home counts down to Christmas in a minimal and modern way.

A clever take on the traditional advent bowl/wreath, this "advent tray" was also found via My Scandinavian Home. As a bonus, it doesn't require buying anything new: just use a tray you've already got, four candles, and some found greenery.

I love the trend in recent years for "wall trees"— they're practical for small spaces, and there's no end to how creative you can get with them. My flatmate and I do the classic fairy light tree on our stair landing every year. Via Buzzfeed.

With a few small nails and some found evergreen branches, you could also create a green wall tree. This one, a DIY from Domino, can even take a few ornaments.

If you don't feel like doing it yourself, you can also buy into the wall tree trend. This jute-and-branch hanging version is available from Cox & Cox in the UK. Here, it's been styled with lights and ornaments (but I think I'd almost like it without).

As for what to put under all those simple trees, there's nothing chicer than brown paper packages tied up with string. Add a bit of greenery and some minimal name tags, and you've got gifts almost too pretty to open. Inspiration via These Four Walls.

Another holiday trend I've noticed recently is for deconstructed and partial wreaths, as seen here from The Merry Thought. Utterly simple and gorgeous.

I've always loved a hanging wreath over a table or kitchen island, as well. It's so elegant and simple to do with a hook in the ceiling. Found via Salad Days.

A holiday vignette on a side table is sometimes all it takes—think a bit of greenery and a lot of candles, as shown on Découvrir Design.

Actually, here's an even more minimal arrangement—greenery not required, just use some branches and pinecones from the garden or local park! Via My Desired Home.

Christmas garlands sometimes bring to mind an OTT, staircase-drowning-in-Douglas fir situation. Not necessarily true, as this window strung with tiny gold bells, via Futura Home Decorating, proves.

For those with a bit more DIY skills (and patience!), these strands of holiday bunting from Bungalow 5 are adorable, and look as though they've been cut from wallpaper.