As parents, we are always looking for ways to display kids artwork. You know, that mountain of creativity they draw, paint, collage at home and school.



Their artwork deserves a special display, but can often end up in a pile despite good intentions. I’m speaking for myself here, but from what I hear, I’m not the only one.

Want to transform that stack of original kid creations into a display that honors their artwork and looks good in your home? Oh, and is easy to switch out as your children create new art or their art style develops and changes?

In this post I’ll share lots of ways to display kids artwork. Some are ones we use or have used and others are ideas I’ve admired. They all fit as many of the above criteria as possible.

Especially the bit about being easy to switch out artwork as your children continue to create and to grow.

21 Ways to Display Kids Artwork

1. Thrifted Frames

This is our own kids art display wall, made out of thrifted frames with the glass and backing removed. We’re still loving it, and I’ve shared a couple posts on “What’s on the Kids Art Display Wall This Month“ showing how the artwork displayed has been changing.

2. Cork Board Frames

Instead of removing the backs, you could simply replace the glass in a set of frames with cork from a roll of cork board as Lisa did from Grey Luster Girl. Now she has a bulletin board display wall for her kids art and can easily pin up new artworks anytime.

3. Matching Frames

Use inexpensive frames to easily switch out the artwork and change what is displayed. Anna from The Imagination Tree did this with her children’s art gallery. She used matching white IKEA frames in a variety of sizes for a cohesive look. I LOVE that colorful cardboard “Create” sign she and her kids made!

4. Hanging display wire

Use an IKEA wire curtain rod system to display the art. The one pictured is by Danielle on The Style Files; with a description of the IKEA set up on Apartment Therapy. Or simply clip the artwork to a wire stretched between a couple of hook-eye screws as Kelli from Random Thoughts of a Super Mom did. So easy!

5. Stylish Floating Wall Shelves

Use ledges or floating wall shelves for a kids art display area. It’s easy to change out the artwork as Kate of Centsational Girl did. You can simply prop up painted canvases, framed art pieces, and 3-D art. Try layering and moving them around as much as you like without putting unsightly holes in the walls.

6. Magnetic Picture Frame Display

Give your fridge art display a makeover with DiY magnetic picture frames as Alysha shared on How Does She? Totally trying this soon!

7. Poster Art

Have Itsy Art turn your favorite kids art pieces into a poster. We were all pleased with how the posters turned out and the kids loved seeing their artwork displayed this way.

8. Pants Hanger

Use pants hangers to display kids artwork. How simple is that?! The Honest Company blog shares fun ideas for letting the kids decorate and personalize them first.

9. Kids Art Book

Melissa from The Artful Parent created a book with her kids’ artwork with PlumPrint and now it’s a prized possession in their house!

10. ArtKive

Use the ArtKive app to photograph your children’s artwork from your smartphone and tag it with names, dates, and descriptions. You can print a book of selected artworks with practically just the push of a button! Sounds like the busy mom’s solution to that book we all intend to create but don’t get around to doing.

11. Clipboard Art Display

Group clipboards together as an art display area on the wall. It will make changing out the art super quick and easy as Jenn does at Clean and Scentsible. Or make your own display clipboards as Liz did at Love Grows Wild.

12. DIY Frame Wallpaper

Make some DiY frame wallpaper where you want your children’s art display, and let your kids draw, paint, and collage their art directly onto the wallpaper.

13. Painted wall frames

Paint fun and colorful frames directly on the wall as Christie from Childhood 101 did.

14. Wall decal & sticker frames

Or use removable wall decals if you want something less permanent. These colorful frame wall stickers are fun! As are these fancy frame decals.

15. Kids-Only Art Display Area or Mix Artwork Throughout Home

Have a kids art-only display area OR mix their art in with the other artwork you have hanging around the house.

16. Child’s Artwork Display Cabinet

Use a Lil DaVinci frame to combine a professional-looking frame with easy storage. Holds up to 50 additional pieces of your children’s artwork. The front flips open to make changing out the displayed artwork easy.

17. Digital Frame

Or, how about a digital frame with a changing display of your children’s artworks? I wouldn’t have thought of this one myself, but a reader says she does and loves it.

18. Canvas Art Display

Transfer your child’s artwork to canvas.

19. Local Art Gallery

Do you belong to a kids play group, children’s art group, or preschool? Consider having an art show at a local coffeeshop, bakery, or ice cream shop for a period.

When you approach the owner/manager with your idea, make sure to mention that you can have a low-key reception for the young artists and their families. This translates to lots of people buying their muffins or ice cream cones! And the kids’ families will likely continue to visit throughout the month to see their art on display and share it with their friends and neighbors.

20. Chalkboard Wall Art Gallery

Turn a chalkboard wall into a kids art gallery as shown on The Artful Kids blog.

21. Vertical Hanging Artwork Display

Or, do as the folks at The Artful Kids blog did next and create a space-saving vertical display with hanging wires.



Which idea for ways to display kids artwork is your favorite?

Pin It for Later