That is not to say Congress will be free of the usual fights over federal spending. Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin said on “Fox News Sunday” that he and Mr. Trump want the hurricane aid tied to a measure increasing the debt limit. That contradicts a demand by Representative Mark Meadows of North Carolina, the leader of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, who warned in an interview with The Washington Post last week that leaders should not try to attach the aid package to the debt limit increase.

If lawmakers can reach détente on fiscal matters, the big question is whether that spirit of cooperation will spill over into bigger policy debates, like health care, taxes and immigration. That still seems like a long shot, but several bipartisan efforts are emerging.

With Mr. Trump threatening to undo former President Barack Obama’s program to allow young immigrants who came to this country illegally as children to stay and work, there is fresh impetus in the House to address the fate of the so-called Dreamers in a bipartisan manner.

Representative Mike Coffman, Republican of Colorado, said last week that he would take the unusual step of filing a “discharge petition” to force a vote on a bill that would extend protections for such immigrants. If he can persuade a majority of the House — 218 members — to sign on, the House will be forced to vote.

“As long as I have Democrat support, I’ll have enough Republican support to pass it,” Mr. Coffman said in an interview. “It will be a rare day in Washington, but it’s important.”

In the Senate, Lamar Alexander, Republican of Tennessee, and Patty Murray, Democrat of Washington, are convening hearings on how to shore up foundering health insurance markets. Their work has the backing of a bipartisan group of governors, led by John W. Hickenlooper of Colorado, a Democrat, and John R. Kasich of Ohio, a Republican.

The Senate’s first order of business may be to take up a $632 billion defense authorization bill, which passed the Armed Services Committee unanimously. There may be some sticking points over policy issues, including whether transgender members of the military who are already serving may continue to do so.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But, said Chip Unruh, a spokesman for Senator Jack Reed of Rhode Island, the senior Democrat on the panel, “I think there’s certainly a lot of agreement on some pretty big-picture things.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

September will be an unusually busy period for lawmakers. Mr. Mnuchin has urged Congress to raise the debt limit by Sept. 29. And Congress needs to pass a spending measure by Oct. 1 to keep the government open.

Lawmakers must also provide funds for the Children’s Health Insurance Program, and reauthorize the National Flood Insurance Program, which is facing a wave of claims from Harvey.

And if Republican leaders want to push through tax cuts — a high priority for Mr. Trump — lawmakers will need to adopt a budget resolution, which will include special instructions, known as “reconciliation” language, that would allow a tax overhaul to pass the Senate with a simple majority, rather than the 60 votes necessary to overcome a filibuster.

“If anything comes out of this horrible, destructive hurricane, maybe it’s that people will realize that we have responsibilities, and the American people expect us to do our jobs,” Mr. Dent said. “I think the American people will grow increasingly tired and frustrated listening to the internecine procedural battles in Washington while people are being rescued from their rooftops.”

But while there might be broad agreement that the government should help Harvey victims, the debate over the size and scope of the aid package could prove contentious.

Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, Democrat of Texas, has called for $150 billion in federal aid, a sum that would eclipse that for Hurricane Katrina in 2005, which cost the federal government about $120 billion. In an interview, she suggested that the number would eventually grow. “It’s a start,” she said.

But Republicans would almost certainly balk at such a huge sum being appropriated at once, and other lawmakers, including Mr. Dent, say it is far more likely that Congress will approve the aid in chunks.

Meanwhile, Texas Republicans like Senator Ted Cruz are coming under fire from Democrats, as well as Republicans in the Northeast, for their opposition to a $50.5 billion aid package in 2013 for victims of Hurricane Sandy. Mr. Cruz and other conservatives have argued that the bill was laden with pork-barrel spending. Now they will be forced to eat a little legislative crow, said John Feehery, a Republican strategist who spent years as a top aide on Capitol Hill.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“For a bunch of Texans who didn’t know they cared about the federal government, they care now,” Mr. Feehery said. “I don’t think this is going to be a moment where Republicans and Democrats start singing ‘Kumbaya,’ but it’s a pretty big crisis, and Congress can’t just do nothing.”

Ms. Jackson Lee, whose district includes part of Houston, spent much of last week at the city’s convention center, which had been turned into an emergency shelter. She said she had spoken with Mr. Cruz, as well as with the House speaker, Paul D. Ryan, and Representative Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader. All, she said, assured her that “there will be no sunshine between their commitment to helping this state.” On Sunday, Ms. Pelosi and Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, issued a joint statement calling for “bipartisan consensus” on hurricane aid and the debt limit.

With Mr. Trump urging lawmakers to pass a tax overhaul by the end of the year, there will be pressure on lawmakers to act quickly, said Judd Gregg, a Republican former senator from New Hampshire who was chairman of the Budget Committee when it handled an aid package for victims of Katrina. He said Republicans cannot run for re-election in 2018 without having some legislative accomplishments.

“My view is they are in a period of survival politics,” Mr. Gregg said. “They’ve failed in so many areas now that unless they do tax reform, they’re all going to be at risk of losing.”