We all know about the awesomeness of TripIt, Airbnb and Hipmunk and how they've revolutionized travel. But there's a new crew of travel startups taking flight and shaking up the industry even more. These 12 startups help you book flights, find the right hotel room, assemble an itinerary and save money — they'll help you land amazing vacations at better prices than ever.

SEE ALSO: 12 Most Cliché Photos on Instagram

What products do you use to book your trips? Tell us about your experiences in the comments.

1. Peek — For Finding and Booking Stellar Activities

Once you've booked a flight and scored hotel deals, how do you figure out what to do when you get to your destination? Sites like TripAdvisor and other forums are full of clutter and can be outdated. Ruzwana Bashir is revolutionizing travel planning with Peek.com (see her own San Francisco itinerary here) , which is part travel agent, part tour guide. Peek curates high-quality activities, displays them in a visually beautifully interface and makes them easily bookable on whatever device you’re using. Peek gets a 15% to 30% cut of every activity booked through Peek.com. You can look for activities based on a number of categories — romantic, under $100, adventures, off-the-beaten-path, tours and more, or you can see what local celebs, chefs, musicians and travel editors note as must-sees in Peek’s "My Perfect Day" section of itineraries.

2. Zaptravel — For When You're Unsure of What You Want

I'd like to take a romantic trip to Europe in August for a week. I'd like to go wine tasting this summer and stay in a 5-star hotel. I want a weekend getaway that will cost less than $400. You used to say these things to your travel agent, who'd use expertise to develop an ideal trip for you. But technology replaced the travel agent, and though there are myriad tools to help you actually book flights and hotels, sometimes you need help figuring out where to go in the first place.

Zaptravel is your digital travel agent, and it uses a semantic search engine to scull through its database (10 million flight routes, 2,000 destinations, 10,000 trip inspirations, 15,000 events, 400,000 hotels and 10 million hotel reviews), then sources the best price from several providers. Because so much travel planning time is spent comparison shopping — and time is money — Zaptravel scores every deal against prices for alternate weekends, similar hotels, favorable guest reviews, events at the destination during your visit, directness of flights and other criteria.

"We only show you deals that make our cutoff," says Zaptravel founder Andrew Lacy. "We want high signal and no noise."

3. Adioso — For the Flexible Traveler Who Wants an Affordable Trip

Adioso is a Y Combinator startup that lets cost-conscious travelers who have a flexible idea of what they want to do on vacation see if there are deals available. If you search for something like, "New York to Bangkok in September for 11 days," the results will provide a few itineraries and prices. If it's too high, you can save your search an receive email alerts when prices drop. If you're not dead-set on going to a specific place, Adioso could help you find a great deal on a unique vacation.

4. Routehappy — For Finding the Most Comfortable Flights

Hipmunk may help you find the best flights in terms of price, schedule and layovers, but there's more to a good flight that that — legroom, snacks, Wi-Fi, DirecTV access, an outlet and a reclining seat (or lack thereof) can have a tremendous impact on how enjoyable and productive your flight is. Routehappy launched this spring to help you book the best flights based on the whole in-flight experience, and each route has an expert. The startup’s data team has compiled a comprehensive database to find out seat layouts, plane types, travel time and amenities for any flight in the world, combining them all into an overall "happiness score."

Plus, Routehappy just rolled out Amazon-style reviews that are graded by Routehappy's Flight Geniuses and offer information about an airline's crew, food, seats and more, as well as information about an airport's security, check-in process, lounges, restaurants and shops. The reviews can help users determine the best way into town from the airport, whether they should pony up for Premium Economy, whether they should get food before arriving at the airport and how they can save money onboard.

5. Triptease — For Finding Lustworthy Destinations

If you didn’t Instagram your vacation, did it really happen? Amazing photography is a central component of daily life, and along with it, travel. With that in mind, Triptease is setting out to revamp the travel review and discovery system with lustworthy, FOMO-inducing imagery. People have emotional reactions to stunning photos, and when you're planning an itinerary, seeing a glimpse of someone else's breathtaking experience in a place can be the difference between a destination being a "must-see" and an "if we have time."

6. Triposo — For Finding the Gems to See While You’re There

Ditch the Frommers and Lonely Planet guides — Triposo's Android and iOS apps serve up custom, dynamic recommendations for things to do and places to go — museums, shopping, parks, beaches, restaurants, clubs and more — based on your location, the time, the weather and your personal preferences, helping people experience destinations in a new way. Triposo has up-to-date information, detailed maps and data-driven recommendations for more than 15,000 destinations in 200 countries. The guides tell you about the history and culture of your destination, helps you book tours, plan sightseeing and daytrips and find restaurants. Plus, there's useful information about currency and language.

SEE ALSO: Around the World in 80 Instagrams

7. Tingo — For Hotel Price Adjustments

When you're planning a trip and trying to stick to a budget, there's no worse feeling than finding out the hotel you booked for $220 a night is now running for $180 a night. Tingo, which lets you book most of the hotels found on established travel sites (it's a TripAdvisor company), will automatically rebook your room at the lower rate and give you a refund if the price drops. The difference will be refunded to your credit card shortly after your stay, and there's no limit to the refund. About 45% of hotel reservations are booked online, according to Tingo, and Americans could have saved more than $300 million if the site existed in 2011.

8. BlackJet — For the Most Stylish Arrival

Love Uber? BlackJet is filling the space between private jets and flying commercial with its "Uber for private jets" business model. Each jet has anywhere from six to fourteen seats onboard, and flights are available in and out of Los Angeles, Las Vegas, San Francisco, New York, Boston, Chicago, Dallas, Florida and Seattle. Looking to book your trip on the fly? Don't worry, there's an iPhone app for that. Appropriately, BlackJet is co-founded by Garrett Camp, the serial entrepreneur behind Uber and StumbleUpon.

9. TheSuitest — For Booking the Right Room

There are hundreds of thousands of hotels around the world, so it can be hard to find the right one for your trip. TheSuitest helps you find the one through a vast array of filters — Indicate the dates you’re traveling, the amenities you’re seeking, your budget and more, and TheSuitest will give you a list of eligible and swanky rooms, enabling you to compare easily. But it doesn't just give you cold hard facts to compare — TheSuitest includes a "fair price" based on price and amenities offered, so you can get a sense of whether the quoted price constitutes a good deal, and each offer has a "deal grade." You can sort results by price, "deal grade," suite score or price per square footage, and the site will show you any extra fees you'll be responsible for.

10. Bag2go — For Keeping an Eye on Your Luggage

Fewer things are more dreaded than arriving at your destination after a long flight only to have your baggage lost or left behind. But Airbus recently unveiled the "Bag2Go," a "smart bag" equipped with GPS, RFID and 2G mobile data capabilities. Bag2Go lets you track your bag’s progress, so you can ensure it made it into the aircraft’s belly. The device turns off for the flight, so you won't be breaking any rules pertaining to electronic devices.

11. Find My Itin — For Crowdsourced Itineraries

Travel planning is a major pain point for 49% of travelers, and travelers spend on about 29 days visiting 20+ websites during the research and planning phase. It's a time-consuming process because resources for trip-planning are scattered and while you can find information about specific destinations, it's hard to find a fully baked itinerary that connects the dots. William Tang and Scott Thompson — childhood friends with a penchant for travel and innovation — are integrating hashtags into travel planning to help you craft itineraries based on three pillars: inspiration, itinerary creation and sharing.

"We've taken hashtags and put them on steroids," says Tang. "Sharing your adventure is as easy as ever as you can fluidly write what’s on your mind and also dynamically hashtag places you’ve been or want to go." With hashtags penetrating mainstream culture, this could make for an interesting way to discover new places to go.

BONUS: HotelTonight — For Even Better Last-Minute Hotel Deals

HotelTonight isn't a new startup — it launched in 2011 to help people find last-minute hotel deals. But the company is upping its game to stay competitive in an evolving landscape. One recent development HotelTonight offers a price guarantee — if you find a better rate for the same hotel on a given night, HotelTonight will match that price. And to piggyback off the rise of the visual web, HotelTonight has a "Snap Your Stay" feature that offers money to guests who take photos of various hotel features in their hotel (in scavenger hunt fashion) and brings more compelling imagery within the app.

Photo courtesy of iStockphoto, skodonnell