Photos by Claire Lower.

The Instant Pot is a great device for quickly cooking big pot roasts and whole chickens, but sometimes—especially if you live alone—you don’t want an entire chicken. Sometimes you just want a couple of thighs, which are arguably the best part of the chicken anyway.

This post is part of Small Food, Big Pot, a new series where we teach you how to make smaller portions of tasty things in your giant Instant Pot.

Unfortunately, you can’t just throw two chicken thighs into the Instant Pot’s stainless steel insert and get to cooking, as the meat won’t release enough liquid for the pot to build up the needed pressure. Adding liquid is the answer, but I don’t really want my meat sitting in a puddle while it cooks. Luckily, there is an easy solution to this issue. You just need another vessel.

Advertisement

By placing your meat in another, smaller bowl and setting it on top of a trivet, you can add the needed amount of water for your Instant Pot to function properly, without having to cook your food directly in the water.

To cook a couple of thick and juicy thighs (which may or may not save lives), you will need:

2 chicken thighs (I like bone-in, skin-on)

Salt and pepper

1 cup of water

The trivet insert that came with the cooker

A smaller vessel that will fit inside the larger insert, such as a Pyrex or stainless steel bowl.

Season the thighs with salt and pepper, then set them inside your Pyrex or stainless steel bowl, skin side up. Pour the cup of water into the Instant Pot liner, place the trivet down inside, and set the bowl containing your chicken on top of the trivet. Close the pot, and make sure the release valve is turned to “sealing.” Press the “manual” button, make sure it’s set to high pressure and, using the “+” or “-” buttons, set the time to 12 minutes.

Advertisement

Once the cooking time has elapsed, wait five minutes, then release the pressure manually by moving the release valve to “venting.” Heat some oil or butter over high heat in a heavy pan—either stainless or cast iron will get it done—and sear the skin of the thighs to get some color and texture on them.

You now have two juicy thighs to enjoy. If you’re one of those fancy people who eats theirs with a knife and fork—rather than gnawing on the bone as I do—be sure to save the bones for stock. The Instant Pot makes excellent stock.

