Set the bar high, Sagittarius. This is your month to start making dynamic and decisive moves. The Sun is having its annual power breakfast in Virgo until September 22, heating up your tenth house of career, ambition and public recognition. Unhook yourself from petty dramas and be rigorous about not sweating the small stuff. You have big plans to accomplish, and you can't afford to veer off track!

Pumping you up even more: Go-getter Mars will blaze through Virgo and this same part of your chart from September 5 to October 22. Mars only visits here every couple years, and you'll want to take advantage of its galvanizing presence to get a big goal off the ground. Be assertive when presenting your grand plans and don't shy away from contacting powerful people in your field, including industry superstars. A celebrity or respected person might be interested in attaching their name to your project, boosting its credibility—and visibility! With the charismatic Sun and Mars in your leadership house, you could see your name in lights, and you can be recognized as an expert on a topic you've mastered.

The tenth house rules men and masculine energy, and this cycle puts you in touch with your own "yang" force (which we all have, regardless of gender identity). A helpful guy—or just a straight-shooting person with no-BS business acumen—could aid your ascent this month. Reach out to mentors and experienced people for advice. Your relationship with your dad or a paternal figure could also be in the spotlight. If there's tension brewing, use this cycle to clear the air instead of waging war.

The September 20 Virgo new moon shoots you out of the cannon, launching a fresh six-month cycle for your career. Set clear-eyed intentions now, because seeds planted today will bear fruit by the corresponding full moon on March 1, 2018. Where would you like to be by then? Map out a few milestones, then reverse-engineer them to identify which steps you'll take to reach them. This new moon is a great day to commit to a job offer, client or firm course of action. Just watch that part of you that wants to rebel against all that certainty. This new moon will form an exact quincunx —a 150-degree angle of adjustment—to freedom-seeking Uranus, which is in your fifth house of passion and play. Make sure you're not zapping all the fun and discovery out of your life by committing to a rigid schedule or accepting a too-demanding position. As a free-spirited Sagittarius, you need space to be spontaneous. Honor that!

That said, it will feel good to get life into a structured groove, especially after the topsy-turvy summer you've had. Not only did the two August eclipses (http://astrostyle.com/august-2017-eclipses/) turn your life inside-out, but communication planet Mercury is retrograde from August 12 to September 5. Until August 31, Mercury was backing through Virgo, throwing a few wrenches into your professional plans. Mercury will wrap up its retrograde in Leo and your outspoken ninth house, which could find you saying the exact wrong thing at the worst possible moment. Apply the strongest possible filters now. Take a time-out from social media instead of engaging with trolls (or accidentally coming across as one yourself). Both Mercury and the ninth house are associated with travel, so if you're heading anywhere for the last official weekend of summer, be sure to check your (packing) list twice, confirm reservations and leave extra early for the airport.

Home and family are in the spotlight on September 6, when the year's only Pisces full moon illuminates your domestic fourth house. You could be inspired to transform your living situation, whether that means a new address, a change of roommates or a renovation project. This is the culmination of the February 26 Pisces new moon, which was also an action-packed solar eclipse. Whatever comes together now could be extra significant. With this full moon stoking your urge for nesting and nostalgia, you might expand your family or reconnect with your roots. If you've been working exhaustively, pause for a day of self-care. A woman, possibly your mother or a maternal figure, could play an important role.

The vibe lightens on September 22, when the Sun swirls into Libra and your eleventh house of group activity for a month. This may be one of your favorite times of year, Sag, because you're at your best—mingling with forward-thinking friends and meeting people from all different walks of life. It's a wonderful time to collaborate or launch a tech-based project, especially one that has a message of social justice.

Your ruling planet, expansive Jupiter, is also wrapping up a 13-month visit to your progressive eleventh house, which runs from September 9, 2016, to October 10, 2017. You've expanded so much socially this past year, joining forces with unlikely new people or creating a trailblazing dream team. While you love to be around vibrant people, you're not always the best at delegating. Risk-taker Jupiter helped you trade your "I'll just do it myself" M.O. for a more democratic approach. And surprise, surprise: You've been able to get a LOT more done by teaming up! With the Sun and Jupiter both in full swing during Libra season, this is an ideal time for networking, throwing parties and getting your message out to the masses.

But before you start sending out invitations and email blasts, a note of caution. On September 28, outspoken Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition with shock jock Uranus in your dramatic and ego-driven fifth house. You might suddenly feel averse to sharing the spotlight (why should someone else get equal credit for YOUR creativity?). Or someone on the Sag Squad could act out with a full-on diva display. If you're hosting a gathering, don't be too casual about mixing people who have divergent politics, especially if one is a known button-pusher. An oil-and-water combo could combust and leave you with a hot mess to clean up.

Jupiter and Uranus are two of astrology's most freedom-loving planets, and they're battling for attention. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could resurface for a grand finale.

The key at this Jupiter-Uranus face-off is to strike the right balance between drama and detachment. Perhaps you've compromised a little too much in your effort to be a team player and now someone else is trying to take credit for your work. You need to confront them, but you also want to do it in a powerful, non-reactive way instead of losing your temper (and your credibility). A disruptive person—possibly an ex-lover or an energy-sucking friend—could reappear and send chaotic ripples through your life. You might get lured into a romantic scenario that you KNOW will turn things upside-down. If you're craving excitement, there's a good chance your “boredom” is actually nervous energy. Find an outlet that doesn't rip through your hard-earned stability like a tornado. And be careful not to take on more than you can humanly handle, even if the initial adrenaline rush spurs you into productivity. This final opposition wants you to learn your limits for once and for all. Chaos comes at a cost, and the price of admission is no longer worth it.

That same day (September 28), shadowy Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your second house of work, money and daily routines. If you’ve struggled to establish good habits or to keep your finances flowing, Pluto's course correction will bring stability back. Pluto is the karmic mirror, and any interruptions to your security should have inspired you to look deeper at your own motives. Why WERE you working so hard or freaking out about funds? A challenging client or coworker may have also reflected something you needed to change about yourself. Hopefully you've done some soul-searching, identifying limiting beliefs and spiritual blocks to prosperity.

Have you found yourself saying things like "You can't always get what you want" or "Man plans, God laughs"? If these cliches have turned into rigid worldviews, stop and question them. Your words also create your reality, Archer—so find more empowering phrases to guide you. Mantras (http://upliftconnect.com/mind-blowing-power-mantra/) have been used in Hinduism and Buddhism to quiet the mind and stay in the present. Your sign, which is known for obsessing about the future, might benefit from having one now.