A few holiday seasons ago, my friend Cassie gave me a jar of Chinese mustard. I put it literally on everything for months: scrambled eggs, breakfast sandwiches, pretzels, grilled cheese. You name it, I smothered it on all the things.

I’ve always been a lover of making condiments, but after her gift, it made me love the homemade iterations even more. So, with that good memory in mind, that’s what we’re doing today.

Today I share with you the fourth part of my series with Wolf and their initiative to #reclaimthekitchen. Reclaiming your kitchen can mean cooking simple meals, setting aside time to cook more often, and taking the time to cook with friends and family and in this case, for them. This includes things that are fuss-free and result in big payoffs. To see other recipes, check out the Wolf’s Reclaim the Kitchen website.

This recipe is as easy as can be. It may not seem like that in the beginning–the milk mixture does weird things, like go from white to light brown to dark, dark brown. It also foams up a bit–so be sure to use a big enough pot so it doesn’t boil over. But in the end, you’ll be met with a thick, jammy (in texture), caramel-y, milky-tasting treat. I can’t describe it exactly but I will say I LOVE it on all sorts of things. I put it on ice cream, which I think is the most obvious choice, but there’s also a slice of toast, in coffee (yes, says the coffee snob) or even on a warm, fluffy biscuit.

I know that some dulce de leches are made like this, while most recipes usually utilize a can of condensed milk. This tastes different from the condensed milk version, which I’ve had a lot. I prefer this one.

This recipe is good to make, jar up and give to friends. It’s a good way to spend a few hours on a Saturday morning. It’s the perfect gift to give someone who is having a rough month. And if you have a friend who is having a good month, it’ll make it even better.

Milk Jam Prep Time: 10 minutes Cook Time: 1 hour Total Time: 1 hour, 10 minutes Yield: 1/2 cup Ingredients 1/2 cup, plus 2 tablespoons, pure cane or white granulated sugar

1/2 vanilla bean, halved, lengthwise, and scraped

2 cups whole milk

1/2 teaspoon baking soda

Directions Just a heads up: The baking soda will make the milk jam foam up so be sure you’re using a big enough pot so it doesn’t boil over. In a medium bowl, mix together the sugar and vanilla bean caviar. Rub it together, until the vanilla bean is thoroughly distributed. To a medium to large saucepan, set over medium heat, pour in the whole milk, the sugar/vanilla mixture and vanilla bean and baking soda. Cook the mixture, stirring occasionally, until it reaches a simmer, about 5 minutes. Once it reaches a simmer or light boil, immediately turn the heat down to low. Allow the milk mixture to simmer gently for about 1 hour. Give it a stir from time to time. During this 1 hour, the milk mixture will foam up and it will go from white milk to a light brown and then to a dark brown. When the milk jam thickens and reaches a dark brown color, take it off the heat for a few minutes. Run it through a fine-mesh sieve. Stir in a pinch of salt and then pour it on everything: ice cream, cake, coffee, get creative with its applications. 3.1 http://www.acozykitchen.com/salty-milk-jam/

(This blog post is part of a paid SocialMoms and Wolf blogging program. The opinions and ideas expressed here are my own.)