Let's face it, CMOs have an enormous amount on their plates. With marketing becoming more complex. It seems that a CMO's responsibilities are growing nearly every day.

Keeping pace with technology and rapidly changing trends can be overwhelming at times. Even more so if you're a CMO and your company wants you to sell more with a smaller budget.

Staying ahead of the trends can often be the key differentiator for brands on how far they can stretch their budget. Fortunately, LinkedIn has made it a bit easier by releasing a guidebook, 5 Trends Every CMO Should Know.

Here's what LinkedIn said CMOs need to know right now.

1) Measurement is becoming more sophisticated

There are more expectations than ever for CMOs to be able to prove their strategies are effective via data and analytics. New technology exists enabling CMOs to make more data driven decisions when deciding where to spend their budgets.

2) Account based marketing enables precision targeting at scale

With newer technology available and more powerful CRM's account based marketing has become easier than ever. Tools like LinkedIn's Sales Navigator make prospecting and funnel building for sales teams highly efficient. Being able to easily find key individuals within organizations and send them a customized message is a powerful way to communicate with targeted accounts.

3) Influencer marketing extends reach

More executives including CEOs and CMOs are finding out that their personal brand can drive tremendous exposure for their company and extend the reach of campaigns. In the past, most high-level executives remained largely anonymous on social media and preferred to do all of their branding and marketing using the company logo.

It's also important that your company reaches out to influencers in your industry and bring them into your community. It's not enough to just have a lot of followers these days.

Influencers provide your company with social proof and exponentially expand the reach of your marketing message.

4) Native advertising drives engagement

Targeted on platform adds on social media sites like Facebook are enabling companies to zero in on their audience with greater effectiveness. Native advertising is one of the most efficient ways to drive traffic to your website.

When your content reaches the feeds of people that have indicated an interest in your subject matter the click rate goes up substantially. This enables you to generate massive amounts of traffic to a landing page where a customer can buy your product or signup for your service.

5) Video is the new content king

LinkedIn was a little slow to get on board with this trend as other social media platforms like Facebook, Snapchat, beBee, and Instagram rolled out their video feature long before they did. But now almost everyone should have the new video feature on LinkedIn. Early adopters are seeing fantastic reach on their videos.

The ability to reach a B2B audience with on platform videos makes LinkedIn's new feature a game changer for marketers.

CMOs should encourage the thought leaders within their companies to make videos on social media. It wouldn't be a bad idea if they did some videos themselves as well.

To get the full report from LinkedIn, including 50 top CMOs to follow, and more great ways to leverage these marketing trends go here.