“I stand by my pardon of Sheriff Joe,” Mr. Trump said.

Mr. Trump has been criticized for bypassing the typical Justice Department review process before granting the pardon to Mr. Arpaio. Months ago, the president asked Attorney General Jeff Sessions and Donald F. McGahn II, the White House counsel, if Mr. Arpaio’s case could be dropped. He was told that it could not be, but that Mr. Trump was well within his presidential authority to pardon Mr. Arpaio.

Mr. Arpaio, 85, served for 24 years as sheriff of Maricopa County. He built a national reputation for harsh conditions in his county jail, and for cracking down against undocumented immigrants. He lost a re-election bid for a seventh term last year, promptly blaming the Obama administration for the criminal contempt charges that were filed against him on Oct. 26 for persisting with profiling Latinos.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Race/Related Newsletter Join a deep and provocative exploration of race with a diverse group of New York Times journalists. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“He would have won the election, but they just hammered him just before the election,” Mr. Trump said. “I thought this was a very, very unfair thing to do.”



During the news conference, Mr. Trump also pledged the federal government’s full support to residents of Texas and Louisiana who are being battered by Harvey, which has since been downgraded to a tropical storm. Promising quick delivery of a multibillion-dollar aid package to the storm’s victims, the president said, “We are 100 percent with you.”

He spoke as rains from Harvey continued to pound the Houston area, stranding thousands of residents in waters that were expected to keep rising. Mr. Trump plans to travel on Tuesday to Corpus Christi, Tex., to survey the damage and storm response. He promised “rapid action” on securing emergency funding to address the damage, saying he planned to move quickly — and he expected Congress to do so, as well.

“You see such incredible work and love and teamwork,” said Mr. Trump, summoning a message of unity after a period in which his response to racial violence in Charlottesville, Va., had been called divisive. “We are one American family. We hurt together, we struggle together and, believe me, we endure together.”

Mr. Trump offered his condolences to Mr. Niinisto for an Aug. 18 attack by a knife-wielding man that killed two people in the town of Turku, in western Finland. The American leader sidestepped a question about whether he considers Russia — which held military exercises last month in the Baltic Sea — a threat.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Trump said that many countries are a threat, and that “I hope that we do have good relations with Russia.”

The New York Times reported on Monday that one of the president’s business associates promised in 2015 to engineer a real estate deal — which would help Mr. Trump win the election — with the aid of the President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia.

“I say it loud and clear, I’ve been saying it for years: I think it’s a good thing if we have great relationships or at least good relationships with Russia,” Mr. Trump said. “That’s very important.”

Mr. Niinisto skirted a question about whether he had advised the American president on security threats Russia may pose. “We are not feeling ourselves as advisers, but we are feeling ourselves as doing all what is possible to maintain peace,” Mr. Niinisto said.