No one looms over the sports universe right now quite like LaVar Ball. From the moment his boys could walk, he’s been molding them into basketball prodigies. His wife calls it “LaVar-ology.” Now Ball’s dream is becoming a reality: getting all three sons into the NBA. So why is he taking so much heat for such unprecedented results? Why isn’t he being celebrated as a sports-dad Svengali? Just listen to the man talk. And talk.

There’s a guy in LaVar Ball’s kitchen in Chino Hills, pitching a TV show. Andy. He’s got gray hair and a bright yellow coat and yellow sunglasses perched on his forehead. His idea is a cartoon: Basketball players by day, superheroes by night. They live a double life, see? Andy’s cell-phone ringtone is the Inspector Gadget theme song, because he helped create Inspector Gadget. He’s a UCLA season-ticket holder. That’s how he met LaVar Ball and his three sons—Lonzo, 19, who is a virtual lock to be a top-three pick in the NBA draft this month; LiAngelo, 18, who just graduated from Chino Hills High and will follow in Lonzo’s footsteps this fall by playing at UCLA; and LaMelo, 15, who scored 92 points in a high school game last year and will now spend his last two years at Chino Hills as perhaps the single most watched prospect in the nation. In the cartoon, Andy says, the boys will be basketball players, as they are in life. “And for the superhero part, we’re going to bring in Stan Lee.” Stan and Andy are partners, Andy says.

It’s a rainy Friday in the middle of February, and the two younger boys have a playoff game tonight against Junípero Serra. Last year, with all three boys playing for Chino Hills, the team went 35–0 and finished atop the USA Today national rankings, earning the attention of pretty much everyone who follows the sport. They did things on a court no coach would sanction. They shot from half-court. They beat teams by 30, 40, 50 points. They were the Golden State Warriors reborn in a suburban gym. The NBA had been careening toward this style of play for years now—the pace of it, the wild shooting, the impatient abandon. Somehow the Ball boys were already there.

Now they’re trying to repeat without Lonzo, who’s currently seeking his own national championship with UCLA. All afternoon people come through the house hitting up LaVar for tickets. When LaVar goes to a Chino Hills game, he goes with 20, 30 people—family, friends, people he trains for his training business, reporters, Andy. Some huge portion of the seats are just his. He’s the gatekeeper. You have to come see him or join the other sad parents spending their Friday lining up outside a high school. “There’s folks in line right now. In the rain!” LaVar says, making an incredulous face. He stands tall and slightly bent in his kitchen, limping around like the former college basketball player he is, loud as a marching band. “This is for high school!”

A young kid in a hooded sweatshirt comes in with his mother. LaVar greets her, asks after her grandmother. He turns conspiratorially to the rest of us in the room. “Susan’s got a grandmother—80 years old. Beautiful. If I was an old man, I’d hit twice.” Susan doesn’t blink. Everyone here is used to LaVar Ball. And he in turn is used to the attention. People gravitate toward him, always have. Though obviously now things are different, stranger, more consequential. There is a wrecking ball of money and fame on its way. It brings out a certain element—a hunger—in those around you. People from LaVar’s past getting in touch. Representatives from shoe companies. Guys like me and Andy.

“You’ve got plutonium in a bottle,” Andy says to LaVar.

LaVar nods. He’s been preparing for this moment for so long already. He’s registered numerous trademarks. On the pool table, just outside the kitchen, are stacks of the family clothing line, Big Baller Brand. One “B” for each boy. No one goes to a game, or out in public with LaVar, without wearing the brand. When I arrived today, this was the first thing LaVar told me: “Yo, what size you wear? Medium? You’re a medium. You’re with us now.” He threw me a shirt, told me to change in the bathroom. There are journalistic ethics to consider, and I do. There is also the force of LaVar’s personality, the size of it, the way it overflows whatever room it’s in. I put on the shirt.

As more people wander in and out of the house, LaVar stands in the kitchen and predicts the future. By midsummer, Lonzo Ball will be a Los Angeles Laker. This is what LaVar wants, and the Lakers seem to love Lonzo, so everyone is going to spend between now and the NBA draft willing this outcome into existence. “It’s a better story,” LaVar says. “Hometown kid, the Ball fans are all here.” (In May, this dream will inch closer to reality when the Lakers land the second pick in the NBA draft.)

"If I’m not crazy, they’re not good enough.”

“And don’t think he going to the NBA and be happy to be there. He’s going to murder people. I think he’ll be a Laker. The only dude who can talk to him is Magic. He’s going to put his arm around him and talk to him. Magic won in his first year—as a rookie. That’s what Lonzo’s going to do. It took Jordan seven years.”

Andy says: “Magic has been in my cartoons!”

LaVar’s wife, Tina, comes downstairs, tall and lovely, her long hair brushed straight, wearing black boots and a black sweater with Big Baller Brand’s bbb logo in gold on the hem. “Here we go,” she says, smiling: “LaVar-ology.”

LaVar puts his arm around her, keeps going:

“I told my boys that one of them wasn’t going to make it. Because if you’ve got three, only one, maybe two make it to the NBA.” He says, right in front of everyone, that he thinks it’ll be his middle son, LiAngelo, who doesn’t make it. He says he’s told him that. “He’s going to be taken care of either way,” he says. At least Gelo is the handsomest of his sons, he says—if basketball doesn’t work out, maybe he could be a model.

Tina says: “All my boys are handsome.”

LaVar says Melo, with his curly blond hair and highlight-reel game, has the most star power. Tina says: “They all have star power.”

LaVar has heard the comparisons to the maniacal sports parents who have come before him. Let them compare all they want, he says—after all, look at where their kids ended up. “You thought Tiger Woods’ dad was crazy. You thought Michael Jackson’s dad was crazy. Venus and Serena’s dad was crazy. I’m on the right path! If I’m not crazy, they’re not good enough.” You could quibble with his methods. Just not his results. Anyway, neither Earl Woods nor Joe Jackson nor Richard Williams had vision like LaVar Ball has, says LaVar Ball. Did any of them, for instance, have their own clothing line?

He gestures at the pool table and the clothing that’s piled on top of it. A $495 Lonzo Ball signature shoe, the soon-to-be-infamous ZO2, will debut in May. But the brand is already strong. “Eighty dollars for a T-shirt—that’s how you know the brand is good. My hat, my leather hat, $100!”

Tina stands next to him, mouthing each word before he says it.

Reasonable people can debate the exact moment that LaVar Ball became a household name. Right now, in February—not yet. But you can feel it beginning, the drumbeat of whatever is coming. In a few days, LaVar will tell TMZ that Lonzo is going to be better than Steph Curry. In March, he’ll tell USA Today that in his own heyday he would’ve beaten Michael Jordan one-on-one. Talk shows will begin calling him up and inviting him on, just to see what he’ll say into a microphone. It will get very big, very fast. A Nike consultant, George Raveling, former coach of USC, UCLA’s crosstown rival, will describe LaVar as “the worst thing to happen to basketball in the last 100 years.” On March 21, after hearing LaVar suggest that LeBron James’s young son was likely to be “not that good” at basketball, LeBron himself will respond. “Keep my family out of your mouth,” LeBron will tell an ESPN reporter. “This is dad to dad. It’s a problem now.” By May the elder Ball will attain such ubiquity that headlines will drop his last name. He will become, simply, LaVar.

But here in the rainy first week of February, in the luxuriant silence of his subdivision, LaVar is already a legend in his own mind. “I’ve always been famous,” LaVar says. “It’s just who you famous to.”

His children had already been renowned for some time. How could they not be? Three boys in a distant, unlovely Los Angeles suburb whose high school team went undefeated in 2016. Lonzo, the eldest and steadiest, was one of the most effortlessly unselfish players to come along in years, a point guard whose passes seemed to come with a notarized letter of instruction about what to do with them. LiAngelo—broad and quiet and shy—was the type of athlete other athletes bounce off of. And LaMelo, the youngest and most mischievous, whose constant talking exhausted even his father, routinely made shots from places Steph Curry would look at skeptically. When I first called LaVar and introduced myself, this was what was on my mind: I wanted to meet the man responsible for such a remarkable thing. But along the way something weirder and different happened. LaVar himself became the story.

One afternoon, as we sat at the edge of the basketball court behind their home, Lonzo told me with some amusement: “He’s on SportsCenter more than me!” LaMelo, in his high, playful voice, agreed—it was like the family had gone through the looking glass. “When I was younger, I always used to [turn on] ESPN just to watch everybody play,” he said. “I was like: ‘I wish I could be on there, or know somebody who’s on there.’ And turn on the TV now, every time you hear LaVar.”

Almost daily, people went on television and on radio and criticized LaVar for the way he had raised his sons, which seemed strange, given their otherworldly talent and success, their unflappable demeanor. What was happening was crazy, but it was also full of crazy love: Only a parent could believe their own children capable of what LaVar knew his children to be capable of. The spectacle was occasionally weird and sometimes grotesque, but every day he was going to war for his kids.

"He’s been doing that as long as we’ve been alive. That’s how we know him.”

As the attention mounted, LaVar’s weight seemed to fluctuate and his voice would become hoarse; I often thought he looked tired on TV. Tina, who was just as enthusiastic a booster for her sons as her husband was, but who is generally lower-key and sane-making, like the grade-school teacher she is, seemed to vanish: One day she was there, and then the next time I visited the house, she was not. To someone like me, who’d just met the family, it all seemed overwhelming—unbearable, even.

But to hear LaVar tell it, this plan had been in motion for some time. Every step of it, he’d seen in advance. The mythology, now well told: how he met Tina, a basketball player herself at Cal State L.A., where they both went to college, and—after he finished his fruitless stint in the lower tiers of the New York Jets and Carolina Panthers organizations—ultimately married her for her beauty, and her height. How he trusted his genetics—five sons and two daughters in his generation, 11 and two in the generation prior—to give him three boys. “One in the middle, two on the sides.” A point guard and two shooters. When his sons were growing up, LaVar would say: “Your mom’s a PE teacher. I’m a trainer. She’s big. I’m big. You guys are big. Your last name is Ball. What else you gonna do?” Weekends, holidays: basketball. A thousand shots from the corner, out by the edge of the pool. Push-ups and pull-ups on the metal bars LaVar and his dad, Anderson—onetime bodyguard for Sylvester Stallone and Mr. T—welded outside the house.

As with most things LaVar says, you can roll your eyes at this—the notion that somehow he really knew, all those years ago, what he was doing. Certainly, people roll their eyes now. But the evidence speaks for itself. LaMelo is still young and undersized, and LiAngelo, the family’s most uncertain prospect, may not start for talent-rich UCLA next year. But LaVar’s dream of having three sons in the NBA is still alive—even likely. There are entire states that produce fewer NBA players in a year than this one household may ultimately yield.

March now, midway through the tournament, and ESPN’s at the house shooting a segment for SportsCenter. When I arrive, everyone’s out back. LaVar has offered Melo $20 to jump from the second-story balcony of their home into the swimming pool. It’s maybe 50-something degrees and drizzling. Melo leaps, crashes into the water, emerges with his blond hair all bent. He’s giggling and shivering. “Yeah—I’ma need my money,” he says to LaVar, as his dad hands him a towel. The ESPN cameras close in on father and sons. Then LaVar heads inside to do an interview.

I don’t see Tina. The three Ball brothers remain out back, hoisting up shots.

They were not denied dinner as children. They were not locked out of the home until they perfected their shooting form. LaVar made his children in his image, yes, but not through drills, or the blank relentless cruelty of an athletic academy somewhere far from home. He did it through sheer force of personality. This whole world—LaVar just manifested it. He had them walking at 8 months, he says. Both Melo and Gelo were born left-handed. “I changed that,” he says.

As we sat outside the house, Melo told me that when he was younger, occasionally he’d revert to his left hand, sometimes on a basketball court: “And so we had to get a rope, tie it, and I just had to use my right the whole time.”

He had your left arm tied behind your back?

“Yeah.”

On the court or off?

“On. And off.”

But not for basketball reasons, according to LaVar. “Because they would mess up the eating at the table. If you left-handed, you next to me,” he told me, waving his right elbow around, the one he’d use to eat, the one that would collide with a lefty son doing the same. That wouldn’t work. He refused to live in a world where his family didn’t eat in perfect harmony. So he fixed it. Melo could see his father appeared strange and loud to the outside world. But “he’s been doing that as long as we’ve been alive. That’s how we know him.”

Lonzo agreed. LaVar is all he and his brothers have ever known. “When you in elementary school, and all the parents dropping off they kids and stuff, and you see my dad come in an Escalade, 24-inch rims on it, usually just bumping! He don’t care about nothing. He’s a little different. But I love him.”

"We’ve been on this journey to get where we at. Don’t get to the line and say, ‘Oh, I can’t play because my mom’ or ‘I don’t feel it like that no more.’ We keep on rolling.”

The rain outside picks up, so the three boys come inside, where they are halted by the ESPN production crew. LaVar’s doing his interview in the living room, and we’re stuck around the pool table by the kitchen, LaVar’s voice booming in from the next room over. It’s uncanny to watch: LaVar talking about his sons on national television in one room, the three of them in another, barely listening.

What do you tell those who say that you’re exploiting your kids by doing this? the ESPN guy asks.

“What the hell do you think UCLA is doing?” LaVar says. “C’mon. It’s exploitation when the family’s doing it, but what are you guys doing?”

Lonzo stares intently at his phone. He scrolls through Instagram. LaVar tells ESPN he’ll take $2 billion for Big Baller Brand, no less, and not one of his sons looks up. He says, “I told my boys this: Somebody gotta be better than Michael Jordan. Why not you?”

As his father says this in the next room, Lonzo’s holding his phone up to his ear, as if to drown out LaVar’s voice. Music plays softly out of the phone’s speaker. He looks at the floor, expressionless, like his mind is somewhere far away.

And then it seemed like the world turned against the Ball family. UCLA, which had cruised through the first two rounds of the tournament behind Lonzo’s assured play, finally lost to Kentucky in the Sweet Sixteen in a game where Lonzo was outplayed by a rival lottery pick, De’Aaron Fox. Toward the end of April, LaVar confessed that his hard-line negotiations with Nike, Adidas, and Under Armour had failed, meaning that Lonzo would come to the NBA without a major sneaker deal. A few days later, the ZO2s appeared, to widespread mockery. He got into increasingly petty arguments on TV.

From a distance, it was surreal to watch: It was the same LaVar—but on a wider stage, beyond the property lines of his house in Chino Hills and the world he’d built there, he could seem misguided. His charisma came off like bluster; his love for his sons, which I did not doubt, would lead him to say things that made life harder for them. He had become, to many, a figure of ridicule, even as the precise plan he’d laid out all those years ago was coming to fruition, right on schedule.

On my final visit to the house, I had to ring the doorbell several times before LaVar appeared, in a Big Baller Brand shirt and slides, bleary from the nap I’d woken him up from. He invited me to sit at the table, adamant that nothing had changed since I saw him last. “I’m the same guy,” he said.

The house was, for once, quiet. I asked after Tina—where was she? “You haven’t seen Tina,” LaVar acknowledged. “Tina’s been ill, that’s why.” She had a stroke, shortly after we’d met. All during the tournaments, as the three brothers played basketball, their mother had been in the hospital. “Everybody had their own speculations on what’s going on,” he told me. “ ‘Oh, Tina left LaVar because he talk too much. I haven’t seen her.’ Y’all can do whatever the heck you want. I know what’s going on. I don’t have to say nothing.”

I asked how his sons had been coping with their mom being sick.

“The boys deal with it very good on the fact that they trust me and say, ‘If my dad says he got Moms, we good. We can go and do what we want.’ They know that I’m going to take care of her and she’s going to be all right. And when you have that coming from your dad, you can play.” LaVar told me that in her absence, he was doing the cooking, the cleaning, washing their clothes. He was handling it. “And they go down there and see her every now and then, but they don’t have to sit down there and hold her hand all day and do nothing. We’ve been on this journey to get where we at. Don’t get to the line and say, ‘Oh, I can’t play because my mom’ or ‘I don’t feel it like that no more.’ We keep on rolling.”

I said it was crazy to think about the past months—his sons in the playoffs, LaVar on TV every day, and this is what was happening in the background the entire time.

“It’s okay, man,” LaVar said. “As long as we take care of ours, we fine, man.”

The important thing was that the story gets its ending. “I’ma make sure they all make it to the NBA. And then whatever happens, fine,” he’d once told me. You could judge him. Many will. But Lonzo will play in the NBA next year. LiAngelo will be at UCLA. And LaMelo, perhaps a generational talent, could still easily surpass them all. Around the family had come a great wave of sound and fury, but inside there was just this: a father and a husband’s love. He was taking care of Tina. His sons were, despite or because of him, exactly where he said they’d be. No matter the cost. No matter what he had to do to get them there.

He was aware that the perception of him had curdled, to an extent. But “here’s where I flip the script on them,” he told me. “I seem loud and boisterous and stuff, and they just think I’m just a dumb dude off the street—not knowing that all this stuff is calculated from day one.” What happened outside the house—the ludicrous boasts, the insults, the sheer relentless ubiquity of LaVar Ball—was not necessarily what was happening inside the house. In public, he continued to loudly advocate for the Lakers to pick his son. But in private, he told me in April, “We’ll play for any team. It don’t matter. Lonzo will get a spot next to the practice facility wherever he go and just sharpen his game and take that franchise to a championship level wherever he goes—Philadelphia, Phoenix, Sacramento, wherever.”

He was at peace with his role in what had happened, and what had yet to happen. Tina would recover, he said. In the meantime, he said, “Ain’t nobody going to stop me from doing what I’m doing. Ain’t nobody going to stop my boy from doing what he’s doing. They said, ‘Are you hurting him by talking?’ I never hurt my boy by talking. I hurt him if I crack him upside the head with a two-by-four. But talking ain’t going to hurt none of my folks.

“Talking,” LaVar said, “ain’t going to do nothing.”

Zach Baron is GQ’s staff writer.

This story originally appeared in the July 2017 issue with the title “The Ballsiest Father in America.”

Introducing GQ Backstory, amplified by American Express: