Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad Sandwich

I’ve never liked egg salad, potato salad, or macaroni salad. Don’t get me wrong, I love salads, just not the mayonnaise based kind. I can’t stand mayo! Well, I recently created a creamy salad that I love and there is no mayonnaise involved. This Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad Sandwich gets it’s creaminess from the avocado! It is my new favorite sandwich. I could eat it every day for lunch…and some weeks I do:) I am sharing the recipe today because it is the perfect GREEN sandwich for St. Patrick’s Day tomorrow!

My lunch time is usually rushed because Caleb needs mama’s attention, so I love that this healthy salad can be made in minutes. The salad is also fun to make because you get to use a fork to smash the chickpeas and avocado together. If you have older children, get them involved and have them help with this step. Caleb is still too young, but someday this will be his job:)

After you get the chickpeas and avocado smashed together, stir in fresh cilantro, green onion, and lime juice. Season with salt and pepper and that is it! I told you it was simple to make. Spread the Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad on two slices of bread and you have a sandwich! I like to add fresh spinach leaves to my sandwich. You can also add lettuce, tomatoes, sprouts, etc. Add whatever sandwich toppings you like.

MY OTHER RECIPES MY OTHER RECIPES

This Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad is also great as a dip for veggies, crackers, and pita chips. It is vegetarian, vegan, and gluten free-as long as you use gluten free-bread or serve as a dip with veggies or gluten-free crackers.

If you are looking for a quick and healthy lunch idea, make this Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad Sandwich. It is one of my favorite sandwiches and I hope you like it too!

Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad Sandwich 5 / 5 ( 6 Reviews

Leave a review » Did you make this recipe? This Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad Sandwich is a great quick and easy lunch option that is good for you too! The salad also makes a great dip! Yield: Salad for 3-4 sandwiches Prep Time: 10 minutes Total Time: 10 minutes Ingredients: 1 (15 ounce) can chickpeas or garbanzo beans (I use Bush’s Garbanzo Beans)

1 large ripe avocado

1/4 cup fresh cilantro, chopped

2 tablespoons chopped green onion

Juice from 1 lime

Salt and pepper, to taste

Bread of your choice (I use whole wheat bread)

Fresh spinach leaves or other sandwich toppings: lettuce, tomato slices, sprouts, etc. Directions: Rinse and drain the chickpeas. Place on a paper towel and remove the outer skins. You can leave them on, but I like to remove them. In a medium bowl, using a fork or potato masher smash the chickpeas and avocado together. Add in cilantro, green onion, and lime juice. Season with salt and pepper, to taste. Spread salad on bread and top with your favorite sandwich toppings. I like to add fresh spinach leaves. Note: This salad also makes a great dip. Serve with cut up veggies, crackers, or pita chips. Also, this salad is best eaten the day it is made because it will turn brown due to the avocado. All images and text © Two Peas & Their Pod .

Follow twopeasandpod on Instagram and show us what recipes you are making from our blog! Use the hashtag #twopeasandtheirpod! We want to see what you are making in your kitchen!

If you like this Smashed Chickpea & Avocado Salad Sandwich, you might also like: