Step One: Don’t be DIY.

The Myth of “DIY”

We see “DIY” a lot these days, it is a hot marketing term that is added to headlines like a bad seasoning. Successful musicians are being described as “DIY” all the time.

Let’s get one thing straight: There is no such thing as a professional “DIY” artist.

What we usually call “DIY artists” are actually successful professional musicians without traditional labels (often they have started their own labels) who have hired many people to help them.

“DIY” stands for “Do It Yourself” and someone who has hired a company’s worth of people to manage their day-to-day business is not actually doing anything themselves. Well, except for their art, which we’ll just assume they do themselves, but that’s just called “being an artist.”

The term “DIY” came out of punk culture, it meant eschewing the socially accepted standard of success and forging your own path. DIY meant making music on your own terms, recording yourself, making your own posters, t-shirts, everything. It meant never charging more than you had to, profit was stigmatized. This was a socio-political art movement about intensely connected, small communities of self-reliant people who did not use professional services.

“DIY” actually meant Do-It-Yourself, not do-it-yourself-but-also-with-some-hired-professionals-who-run-your-label-while-you-strum-your-guitar.

When the internet paved the way for more musicians to go it on their own without a record label and traditional management the term got more and more usage.

But today the term “DIY” is a lie.

Don’t call me “DIY”

As a professional musician I’m about as “DIY” as it gets, I book my own shows, do my own graphic design, make many of my own videos, code my own websites, ship my own merchandise, drive myself to shows, set up my own gear… you get the picture.

But I am not “DIY.” I am(drumroll, please) an artist.

AND a business person.

…who is helped by legions of fans, friends, volunteers, family, fellow musicians, and hired help.

I don’t call myself “DIY.” I am an artist, making art, and doing whatever I need to do to reach my fans. I do a lot of things myself, but my fans help me, my friends help me, and the people I hire help me a lot.

DIY is for spice racks

Perhaps you like to make things. And you call this “DIY.” In this way what you mean is that you, a non-professional, are doing something without professional help.

You are not a carpenter, but you are making a spice rack.

You are not a plumber, but you are fixing your own plumbing.

You are not a mechanic, but you can change your own oil.

You are not a chef, but you just made yourself dinner. (Totally DIY’ed this mac n’ cheese.)

I heartily endorse being fully engaged in your life and taking a physical role in it. Make things! Do things! Yes! Things!

The Maker culture and true DIY enthusiasts are great. I certainly don’t want to knock the wonderful world of learning and creating and making. It’s when we conflate “DIY” with professional independent artists that the term starts to lose meaning.