When a fresh batch of snow falls to the ground, the world tends to quiet down.

That could partially be attributed to human factors: it's likely winter, people aren't out as much and traffic comes to a halt. However, there are more scientific reasons for the quietude. When a fresh blanket of snow settles down, it's doing a lot more than turning the world into a winter wonderland.

"When snow falls, it does absorb some of the soundwaves," says Bernadette Woods Placky, a meteorologist and director of Climate Central's Climate Matters program.

As snowflakes stack up, there is more space left between them, compared to the surface of liquids like water. With all that space, sound is unable to bounce off snow as easily as it would off water, Woods Placky tells Mashable. As a result, the sound gets absorbed.

See also: This cozy Danish custom could help cure your winter blues

To forecast an amount of snowfall, meteorologists measure the liquid equivalent that would be falling from the sky, Woods Placky explains.

"The general ratio is about one inch of rain would be 10 inches of snow," she says. That rule of thumb emphasizes just how thick snow can get thanks to its frozen quality. And the colder the weather gets, the fluffier the snow will be, which means even more space to absorb sound.

For perspective, Woods Placky gives an example: One inch of rain in 32 degree weather would equal 10 inches of snow. Drop that temperature down into the twenties, and that increases to 15 or 20 inches of snow.

Naturally, other factors like less people outside and on the road also account for the quietude. Traffic stalls tremendously during and after a snowstorm, due to icy roads and the dangers it presents to drivers.

Many animals, such as birds, also aren't out as much. They have to adapt to snowy weather that makes their environment colder and their food more difficult to find.

Though settled snowfall turns the volume down on the world, Woods Placky points out that large snowstorms like Nor'easters (cyclonic storms that move along the east coast of North America, according to the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration) are wildly loud.

"They are really wound up and you’re left with a lot of wind until things settle down," she explains.

But after the storm and howling wind pass, freshly fallen snow goes back to absorbing sound waves as usual.