ON AUGUST 27th the results of a trial of an anti-inflammatory medicine called canakinumab were released at a meeting, in Barcelona, of the European Society of Cardiology. Press reports were gushing, telling of a fabulous new drug that would cut the risk of heart attacks and cancer at the same time. The coverage was so positive that people reading or hearing it might have been forgiven for wondering when this treatment would be available to everyone. The answer is probably “never”, for canakinumab’s benefits have been greatly oversold. This trial was, nevertheless, important. Though it offered no immediate treatment, it confirmed what has long been suspected—that inflammation is an important factor in heart disease.

It has been common knowledge for decades that one way to reduce someone’s risk of having a heart attack is to keep his cholesterol levels low. But that is only part of the story. About half of heart attacks happen to those who have what are considered normal levels of cholesterol. Trials show that even people who do not have high cholesterol levels benefit from being prescribed cheap, cholesterol-lowering statin drugs. Since another effect of these drugs is to reduce inflammation, the suspicion has been that this is where the protection is coming from. But the cholesterol-lowering properties of statins have made it impossible to isolate this effect.

The new study, co-ordinated by Paul Ridker of the Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, could look at inflammation by itself because canakinumab reduces only that, and not cholesterol levels. Dr Ridker and his colleagues took 10,000 patients who had had heart attacks and who were receiving high doses of statins. They gave some of them quarterly injections of canakinumab in addition. Participants taking a 150mg dose of the stuff proved 15% less likely, over the four years the trial lasted, to suffer a further heart attack or a stroke than did those not so treated.

Patients on canakinumab also showed a drop in rates of death from cancers of several sorts, and in the actual incidence of lung cancer. As with heart disease, inflammation exacerbates the effect of cancer. The flip side of the study, though, is that there were significantly more deaths from infection among those who received canakinumab—an effect large enough to cancel out the drug’s positive effects on mortality, including its anti-cancer effects.

The excitement surrounding this trial is therefore scientific rather than clinical. It provides evidence for a possible new way of treating coronary-artery disease, by developing ways to inhibit inflammation. Canakinumab itself is a type of medicine called a monoclonal antibody. Many such drugs are expensive. They cost tens—sometimes hundreds—of thousands of dollars a year. Though appropriate for treating people with actual illnesses, or a serious risk of developing one, they are not suitable for use as general prophylaxes in the way that statins are. But other prophylactic ways of reducing inflammation might be.

Nor need such approaches be pharmaceutical. For many years, epidemiology has shown an association between consumption of oily fish and a lower risk of coronary-artery disease and strokes. A probable cause is the anti-inflammatory effect of fish oil, which is predominantly a type known as omega-3, because of a feature of its molecular structure. Indeed, an Italian study published in 2002 showed that one gram a day of supplementary omega-3 oil reduced death from cardiovascular disease by 30% in those who had recently survived a heart attack.

The best advice of all, though, is “eat less and exercise more”. Being overweight is, itself, a way of provoking inflammation. And exercising, independently of its effect on body weight, is also anti-inflammatory. Numerous studies show this, and that exercise protects directly against heart disease. Diet and exercise rarely make the front pages in the way that drug trials do—and should, of course, be supervised by a doctor if the individual concerned has a dodgy heart. But for most people they remain the best medicine of all.