Looking for Instant Pot recipes? Well, it’s your lucky day, ’cause I have a ton for you to choose from!

After reading Marie Kondo’s The Life-Changing Magic of Tidying Up and joining the cult of KonMari, I was determined to dump or donate all of my kitchen appliances that no longer spark joy. I happily rounded up the bread machine, toaster, and panini maker that have been languishing in my appliance graveyard (a.k.a. our garage), and dropped them off at Goodwill. From now on, I’m keeping only those kitchen gadgets that I actually use on a regular basis.

Believe it or not, there are only a handful that are making the cut—and even though I don’t like to play favorites, the one appliance that clearly deserves a permanent place on the counter (and in my heart) is my Instant Pot. My excuse is that it’s a 7-in-1 appliance (or 9-in-1 now!), so it’s replacing a bunch of other appliances—but to be honest with you, I pretty much use my Instant Pot only for one thing:

COOKING UNDER PRESSURE.

You’ve heard me say it before: pressure cooking is a gamechanger—especially for home cooks with hectic schedules like mine. When I’m pressed for time but craving foods that usually take forever to prepare (like bone broth, tough cuts of meat, braised winter vegetables), I turn to my pressure cooker. Plus, there’s the added bonus of saving money because I can turn cheaper braising cuts like brisket and shanks into simple weeknight meals. In fact, even when I do have enough time to use a slow cooker, I’ll whip out my Instant Pot ’cause when it’s done cooking, this smart little appliance naturally depressurizes and keeps my food warm until I’m ready to eat. No fuss, no muss!

Although I also own a stovetop pressure cooker, my electric Instant Pot gets the most use. It’s basically foolproof, and I never have to babysit it. Even if it’s sweltering hot, I can quickly whip together a savory stew without heating up my kitchen, which means it’s perfect for year-round cooking.

[One thing to note: The Instant Pot cooks at a slightly lower pressure (11.6 psi) than my stove top pressure cooker (15 psi), but that just means adding a few minutes to the cooking time. My general rule of thumb is to increase cooking times by 7 to 15% when using my Instant Pot for a pressure cooker recipe.]

My three favorite time-saving pressure cooker hacks:

When our family is about to sit down to dinner, I start cooking another meal—usually a stew—in the Instant Pot. By the time we’re done eating, the stew is finished cooking, which means I can store it in the fridge for later—and do the dishes just once. Tired of waiting for bone broth to cook? Throw the ingredients for bone broth into your Instant Pot before heading off to bed. By the time you wake up, you can strain and store the broth for later. Bonus: no stink! Before tossing it into your Instant Pot, make sure to cut your meat into uniform pieces to ensure even

cooking. Also, it goes without saying that smaller cubes cook faster than bigger chunks (so I’m totally not going to say it).

Many of my readers have asked that I write an Instant Pot FAQ, but why re-invent the wheel? If you have questions about cooking times, turn to these charts by Hip Pressure Cooking. Got more questions about the Instant Pot? This helpful post on Dad Cooks Dinner should answer all of ’em.

Looking for a deal on the Instant Pot? I update this page with the latest deals and discounts!

Ready to start pressure cooking? Then roll up your sleeves and test drive my favorite Whole30-friendly pressure cooker and Instant Pot recipes:

Craving Hawaiian kalua pig? You can get it in your belly in just 2 hours using a pressure cooker. TWO HOURS. And I hate to say it, but I think it tastes even better than my slow cooker version. Really.

My kids happily eat this nutrient-packed veggie side dish without any complaints. ’Nuff said.

Now that potatoes are back on my plate (seriously: they’re even Whole30-compliant, people), this is my favorite and quickest way to cook them!

If Indian curries are your jam, make these curried ribs today!

This recipe is incredibly satisfying and comforting. The tender meat falls right off the bone. And I’m getting hungry just writing about this dish.

One of my all-time favorite beef stews!

Got beef back ribs? And a pressure cooker? Then make some tender, finger-lickin’ ribs in no time at all!

My pal Steph Gaudreau is responsible for this fabulous recipe—I just made it quicker to get into your mouth.

Mushrooms + tomatoes + short ribs = umami explosion. If you haven’t tried this recipe, what are you waiting for?

As soon as anyone in my family complains about feeling under the weather, I grab some frozen bones from the freezer and make a batch of pressure cooker bone broth—pronto. You can, too!

This noodle imposter can be made in a flash in your pressure cooker. I normally make spaghetti squash ahead of time and keep it in my fridge for instant veggie gratification.

This flavor-packed Vietnamese beef stew is comfort in a bowl.

Try this umami-packed Thai-inspired chicken stew tonight! It’ll only take 30 minutes!

So easy and delicious, with a blast of Asian flavors. This one will be a weekday staple!

A family favorite for Taco Tuesday—or Wednesday, or Thursday, or Friday…

This is a quick blast of summer, with tender chicken, juicy cherry tomatoes, fragrant fresh herbs, and buttery, briny green olives.

In 20 minutes from start to finish, you’ll get a batch of perfectly cooked and easily peeled eggs!

My favorite way to cook soup in a pressure cooker!

I’ve added Instant Pot instructions for this umami-packed stovetop recipe!

So easy, tasty, and freezable. Make it now!

This slow cooker classic just got a modern pressure cooker update!

This bowl of goodness will taste as good or better than the pho at your local Vietnamese noodle joint!

Behold: Instant Pot Korean Short Ribs! It turns out that my classic recipe for this deeply flavorful, Asian-inspired dish is even easier in an Instant Pot!

I’ve perfected a porktastic Instant Pot Carnitas recipe that will rival what you’d order at your favorite taqueria!

When you use a pressure cooker to steam beets in an Instant Pot, you can have fork-tender, finger-staining vegetables in 30 minutes, from start to finish!

This budget-friendly weeknight supper feeds a crowd and is Whole30-friendly, too!

Psst! I’ve updated my Recipe Index to include special Pressure Cooker/Instant Pot and Slow Cooker categories! Remember to bookmark this master list, and check back, ’cause I update it whenever I post a new recipe.

Now, GO PRESSURE COOK SOMETHING!

Looking for more recipe ideas? Head on over to my Recipe Index. You’ll also find exclusive recipes on my iPhone and iPad app, and in my cookbooks, Nom Nom Paleo: Food for Humans (Andrews McMeel Publishing 2013) and Ready or Not! (Andrews McMeel Publishing 2017)