1 Terrence Howard Is A Habitual Woman-Beater (And Is Also Shithouse Crazy) Terrence Howard Is A Habitual Woman-Beater (And Is Also Shithouse Crazy)

Steven Henry/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images

Possessing a commanding, cool-eyed stare that can probably make panties spontaneously combust, Terrence Howard has enjoyed a fairly successful acting career, but is arguably most famous for his masterful portrayal of a drug dealer turned hip-hop mogul in the massive hit show Empire, and for being replaced by Don Cheadle in the Iron Man movies. But Howard had kind of a horrifying childhood, as he recently discussed in an interview with Rolling Stone which needs to win some kind of award for casual insanity.

When Terrence was six years old, he was waiting to see a department store Santa Claus when some guy accused his father of butting in line. The elder Howard responded by stabbing that guy to death with a goddamned nail file.

Cleveland Plain Dealer / Landov

It was the most immediate path to the Naughty List in history.

Unfortunately, that undeniable trauma appears to have manifested itself in the form of violent disdain for human females. Howard allegedly beat up his first wife, Lori McCommas, in 2001. While in Costa Rica with his second wife, Michelle Ghent, in 2013, he "followed [her] into the restroom ... punched her on the left side of her face ... pushed her against the bathroom wall and strangled her for several seconds". His third wife, Mira Pak, pretended to be happily married for the aforementioned Rolling Stone interview, hiding the fact that her divorce from Howard was only a month away from being finalized.

Neilson Barnard/Getty Images Entertainment/Getty Images



Here they are, whispering sweet reminders of the prenup into each others' ears.

Howard has also been escorted from an airplane for violent behavior and, in 2005, got in a disagreement with a couple in line at a restaurant which ended with him shoving the man to the ground and punching the woman in the face. It is important to note that he saved his punch for the woman in this altercation, because we suppose that's how he draws his strength. In Howard's defense, this is not a man you wish to accuse of butting in line.

In the time between his falling out with Marvel Studios and landing his role in Empire, Howard spent 17 hours a day in his penthouse constructing random shapes out of plastic and wire -- shapes that, somehow, prove his world-changing theory that 1x1=2, and not 1 (the correct answer). Perhaps it would all make more sense if we could read his reams of notes on the subject, but unfortunately they're written in Terryology, a language of his own invention. None of that is a joke.

Bernie is currently pursuing a career as a freelance writer or anything that allows him to do what he loves most: buy used celebrity tissues on eBay. He has a Twitter.

Psst ... want to give us feedback on the super-secret beta launch of the upcoming Cracked spinoff site, Braindrop? Well, simply follow us behind this curtain. Or, you know, click here: Braindrop.

For more celebrity behaviors that you've forgotten or willfully ignored, check out 23 Insane Things Your Favorite Celebrities Believe and 17 Outrageous Lies Celebrities Thought They'd Get Away With.

Subscribe to our YouTube channel, and check out The 5 Most Hilariously Drug-Fueled Celebrity Interviews Ever, and watch other videos you won't see on the site!

Also, follow us on Facebook, and let's speculate about who's gay in Hollywood.

Did you know cats modeled their "meow" after the cries of human babies, just because they knew us humans care about that noise? Did you know dogs can read your mind (emotionally), and live in constant suspicion that you know where the good food is (you totally do)? In the next LIVE episode of the Cracked Podcast, host Jack O'Brien leads Cracked's team of pet-loving/fearing comedians through all the ways our dogs and cats are more powerful, creepy, and awesome than we ever could have imagined. Jack will be joined by Carmen Angelica, Dan O'Brien, Alex Schmidt, and Jake Weisman at the UCB Sunset Theatre on Wednesday, March 9, at 7 p.m. Purchase your tickets here!