Summer may officially be ending, but you're just warming up. With the Sun making its annual rounds through Virgo and your expansive ninth house until September 22, you're brimming with inspiration and possibility, eager to connect with a wider swath of the world. Motivational Mars is also here from September 5 to October 22, pumping you up to take a bold and inspiring risk. Some off-season travel could be just what the cosmos ordered, with el Sol in this globe-trotting zone of your chart. Bonus: You'll avoid the obnoxious tourists, skip the crowds AND save money now that peak dates have passed. Sniff out deals even if it's just for a weekend getaway. Can't leave city limits? Attending a class, lecture or workshop could also sate your hunger for fresh perspectives.

You're probably ready for a reboot after August's intense eclipses , which overlapped with a Mercury retrograde cycle spanning August 12 to September 5. Until August 31,the communication planet was retrograde in Virgo and this same on-the-go part of your chart. Travel plans may have been thwarted or riddled with annoying curveballs. With mouthy Mercury gone rogue in your outspoken ninth house, your loose lips may have sunk a few ships (a la your signmate Anthony Scaramucci, who became a poster child for the perils of unfiltered rants).

Now Mercury will wrap up its retrograde in Leo and your intimate, secretive eighth house. Watch for jealousy-fueled spats and people trying to draw you into their dramas. With technology-driven Mercury meddling in your long-term-finances house, keep tighter tabs on your transactions. Change passwords and guard against identity theft by using only secured shopping sites and taking cash out at the bank instead of a sketchy convenience-store ATM.

Once the messenger planet corrects course on September 5, it's showtime again. Get back on people's radar with a positive and clearly defined agenda. Send out your press releases on (or after) September 6, when the year's only Pisces full moon illuminates your third house of communication. Now that Mercury's tantrums have calmed down, you're safe to blast out those missives and messages, knowing you won't be misunderstood. Make like U.S. Rep Maxine Waters and start "reclaiming your time" , starting now.

Keep your devices charged: You could get major news or a long-awaited green light on a passion project. This full moon is the culmination of the February 26 Pisces new moon, which was also a potent solar eclipse. Ventures that involve writing, media and teaching get a lunar lift. A collaboration could become official, or you could attract a kindred spirit. Stuck at an impasse? Put the word out for someone with complementary skills, then get the interview process underway.

Another big moment arrives on September 20, when the year's only Virgo new moon kicks off a six-month chapter for entrepreneurship, education and expansion. Sign up for a class or hire a business coach to help you get a savvy start-up idea off the ground. Start booking travel for the holidays or mid-winter and score an early-bird deal. Round up enterprising friends for a mastermind group or an activist project that unites people around key issues (climate change, immigration rights, take your pick these days). Whatever your visionary plan may be, this new moon marks a great day to get started.

But before you go soaring off into the cerulean skies, unpredictable Uranus in your domestic fourth house may temporarily clip your wings. As the side-spinning planet locks into an awkward quincunx with la luna, interruptions from home base could thwart your visionary plans. Your own emotions could be all over the place, as deep-seated insecurities rear their heads JUST as you're about to take a big risk. A disruptive female relative or a curveball situation at home can heighten confusion, making you second-guess yourself.

Listen, Cap, you don't have to throw ALL caution to the wind today, but please toss enough of it aside to allow you to take a legit gamble. If you don't, you'll never actually grow. How will you know you're doing that? Since you don't have a rock-solid guarantee that everything will turn out a certain way, you'll have to take a leap of faith. You have that nervous, slightly queasy feeling in your belly, a flutter in your chest. Let go, Capricorn. Take a cue from Anais Nin: "And the day came when the risk to remain in a tight bud was more painful than the risk it took to blossom."

All this adventure has been exciting, but at the end of the day, you're still a Capricorn—and you do require SOME modicum of predictability. Without a concrete plan in place, it's hard for you to really let loose. Good news: You'll buckle down and get back to business on September 22, when the Sun starts its monthlong foray through Libra and your polished, professional tenth house. This zodiac zone is naturally ruled by Capricorn, so you'll be in your element during this structured spell. Send those power suits to the cleaners and pack up your flip-flops. It's time to conduct some serious strategy sessions and fast-track your ambitious plans!

Before you dive into a workaholic frenzy, press pause! On September 28, outspoken Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition with shock jock Uranus in your domestic and personal fourth house. Configuring your work-life balance could be an exercise in frustrating futility. Just as the red-spotted planet introduces an opportunity for major growth, disruptor Uranus pulls the rug out from under you. Maybe the job offer of your dreams arrives…and demands that you relocate to Belgium or Burkina Faso for a year (glug). An unexpected pregnancy or family surprise could throw you off your ten-year plan.

Jupiter and Uranus are the most freedom-loving and hotheaded planets, and they're battling for attention. Curveballs should be expected. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could resurface for a grand finale. Where do you need to be more open and flexible, and where could you stand to be firmer?

The bigger lesson of these clashes has been to balance head and heart, professional and personal. If you prioritized work over everything, life intervened to remind you that, y'know, you can't take it with you. If you sidelined your goals to play the dutiful "rock" for relatives, these oppositions gave you a jolting reminder that YOUR needs matter just as much. Boundaries exist for a damn good reason, and if you're a Capricorn who hasn't enforced yours lately, it's time. You can't expect people to read your mind. Letting them know your limits instead of silently seething because they "should know better" (um, no!), is actually one of the kindest things you can do for EVERYONE involved.