Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

MONTH OF September

MONTHLY OVERVIEW:

Give yourself a minute, Libra. While others are rushing into back-to-school mode, you’ve got planetary permission to ease your way into autumn. The Sun is wending its way through Virgo and your twelfth house of rest, retreat and closure until September 22. You may still have unfinished business to handle or powerful emotions to process that require gentler handling. Maybe you’re not quite ready to emerge from dreamy vacation mode. Go ahead and take that road trip through a national park or escape to a yoga retreat.

Don’t rush back to so-called reality. You’re still recovering from a manic August, where you’ve been surrounded by a million people and probably focused heavily on everyone but yourself. Last month’s two earth-shaking eclipses stirred up a social frenzy and possible drama—and TBH, the whole world is still reorienting from it. Everything just felt so intense! It hasn’t helped that communication planet Mercury has been retrograde (www.astrostyle.com/mercury-retrograde) from August 12 until September 5. You may have felt overwhelmed or lost in your thoughts—a part of the crowd and, at the same time, a bystander on the sidelines. The first week of September will bring more of these “dual reality” moments.

Energizer Mars will be in Virgo and your illusory twelfth house from September 5 until October 22, putting your batteries in “power-saving” mode. You may need more sleep—and truth be told, your time on the pillow (or meditation cushion) could be your most productive. This is a potent time to do forgiveness work, plow through a task you’ve been avoiding or contemplate the meaning of life. You might have intense, disturbing dreams and restless sleep—a sure sign that you need a mental break. Even a passing glance at the news can be distressing, especially to your peaceful sign. While we don’t advocate sticking your head in the sand, take breaks or listen to empowering perspectives. You might enjoy this video by spiritual teacher Marianne Williamson (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=CQSPMBeVykU) on how to handle current events in an enlightened way but without the “love and light” denial.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

The twelfth house rules the subconscious, and with the Sun and Mars here, your focus is decidedly internal. Just go with it! With your creative and spiritual fires stoked, the muse could make frequent pit stops at Chateau Libra. Carve out space to hear her divine messages. Let yourself be a channel for art, discovery and healing by adopting an attitude of awe and wonder. Instead of forcing an agenda, simply be receptive. Open your arms to whatever mysterious and miraculous events arrive. Follow the breadcrumb trail of “coincidences” and “signs” that the universe puts in your path, from seeing repeating numbers on the clock or license plates (www.astrostyle.com/master-numbers) to hearing a departed loved one’s favorite song just as you’re thinking about them.

The ONE day to balance this flowy energy with focused, practical action arrives on September 6. Your cinematic reveries get a commercial break, courtesy of the Pisces full moon, which illuminates your sixth house of organization, health and administrative tasks. Your inner taskmaster swings by, helping you put that energy to work before you go off the metaphorical grid again. Tackle any to-do list items you’ve been avoiding. Analyze budgets, finalize your fall calendar, write lists. Return calls and emails. If you need to schedule checkups and appointments, do it all in one fell swoop. You could get exciting work news or pinged by a recruiter for an intriguing position.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Have you started sneaking smokes or indulged in one too many chardonnay-soaked nights? This wellness-minded moon gives you the resolve to kick any bad habits you’ve picked (back) up over the summer. You could get a burst of inspiration to start or reignite a fitness regimen. But take it slow and steady—this is NOT the time to sign up for boot camp or cut out a major food group. (Your best bet: Wait for go-getter Mars to enter Libra on October 22 to charge into sunrise burpees and eliminate sugar.) Watch for stress at this anxious full moon. If you feel overwhelmed, delegate to helpful people. Hire a pro for a few hours to build your shelves, file your taxes or deep-clean your house. The investment will be well worth it!

Another day for fresh starts and reinvention arrives on September 20, when the year’s only Virgo new moon illuminates your twelfth house of transitions. A new moon in the twelfth house is a bit of a paradox: new moons mark fresh starts, but this zodiac sector rules closure and finality. Yet endings are also beginnings—as the saying goes, one door closes and another opens.

You may feel this quite palpably now, especially in a relationship. This new moon will form an exact quincunx (www.astrostyle.com/aspects/quincunx)—a 150-degree angle of adjustment—to unpredictable Uranus in your committed-partnership house. A significant person could enter or exit your life, or deliver curveball news that finds you scrambling to adapt. Maybe your S.O. gets a job offer that requires relocation, or a major client decides to go in a new direction. Libra, you’ll have some soul-searching to do before you can figure out how YOU fit into this equation.

While your companionship-oriented sign is always willing to make sacrifices for the ones you love most, there are limits. Being a martyr or acting in a codependent manner will only leave you feeling resentful down the line. Don’t be so quick to compromise that you end up with a bunch of regrets. That said, you might decide to embrace an opportunity for change and adventure—one that arrives through a key player in your life.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Putting yourself first gets easier starting September 22, when the Sun begins its annual march through Libra and your first house of self. Advocate for your needs, and front-burner your solo agenda. You’ll crave more independence now and will have an easier time clarifying your personal boundaries. Since the first house rules appearances, a fall hairstyle and wardrobe update could help usher in your birthday season with a sense of a fresh start.

Go big: Expansive Jupiter is rounding out a 13-month visit to Libra that began on September 9, 2016, and ends this October 10. You’ve been on a huge reinvention tour all year, as this visit from risk-taker Jupiter only comes around every 12 years. Your life could be wildly different from what it was a year or two ago. Jupiter in Libra kicked off a new 12-year chapter of your life and taught your sign the joys of independence. Any reluctance to fly solo or roll the dice on your passions should be a thing of the past. With both the Sun and Jupiter now in Libra, you’ll be inspired to take a less-traveled path in your pursuit of personal happiness and fulfillment.

But before you get too “all about me,” look around. On September 28, outspoken Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition (www.astrostyle.com/aspects/opposite) with shock jock Uranus in your partnership house. Jupiter and Uranus are two of astrology’s most freedom-loving planets, and they’re both battling for attention. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could resurface for a grand finale.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

As the month ends, you could find yourself in a heated battle between pursuing your own path and supporting a partner on theirs. Or just as you’re about to hunker down with a solo project, unpredictable Uranus could bring interruptions from everyone in your life. Distraction alert: Getting wrapped up in other people’s dramas will blow you way off-track. Under these extreme skies, you could go to the opposite end of the spectrum, cutting people off instead of simply setting and enforcing proper boundaries.

If you’re in a relationship—or considering a commitment—you could get a major case of cold feet. You might be tempted to ditch your duties when the going gets tough, or abandon a creative project because you’re not getting an enthusiastic response right away. Easy does it, Libra. It takes more than a minute to build things that will stand the test of time. Be firm as your resolve is tested. What is your core commitment? Use any waves of doubt or uncertainty to clarify that. Avoid making rash, life-altering decisions now.

Tuning in to your emotions will get easier on September 28 (the same day of the Jupiter-Uranus face-off) because Pluto, ruler of the unconscious, ends a five-month retrograde in your fourth house of home, family and foundations. Pluto’s backspin churned up old fears and family friction, possibly with your mother or a female relative. This cycle pushed you to question your closest ties: Are they bonding (healthy) or binding (unhealthy)? As a Libra, you hate conflict and upsetting people, but as a result, you don’t always speak up for your own needs out of fear that you’ll rock the boat and end up abandoned. It’s time to confront those demons and balance the give-and-take with your loved ones. If a move or pregnancy plans have stalled or you’ve had power struggles with a child, Pluto’s direct turn will help. Chances are, this difficult situation was sending you an important message, revealing where YOU needed to bring more self-awareness and personal responsibility to the table.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Mystical Pluto in your house of nesting could inspire you to transform your home. Some toxic energy may be lingering, especially if you had domineering houseguests or went through a difficult time emotionally. Begin with a deep cleaning and decluttering. Organize stray items into systematized groups and get adequate storage options. Move furniture around to change the flow. You could do a space clearing (https://www.thespruce.com/do-a-major-space-clearing-session-part-1-1274976) or home blessing ritual to welcome in new energy.

LOVE & ROMANCE:

Should you get swept away or play the field? You need intimacy AND autonomy this month, as the love planets steer you in dueling directions. On the lighter side, vivacious Venus is in Leo and your outgoing eleventh house until September 19, tempting you to flap your social butterfly wings. Without trying, you could draw a bevy of admirers: Venus here gives you an instant popularity boost! Sparks could fly with a friend, coworker or someone you meet through mutual contacts. Whether you “go there” or just enjoy the fun chemistry is up to you. No pressure, as Venus in your indie-spirited eleventh house doesn’t portend getting overly serious. Since the eleventh house also rules technology, you could meet interesting prospects through dating apps. For couples, this social cycle is perfect for attending events and parties together (or hosting one) and enjoying your mutual friends.

Sultry Mars is also in Leo until September 5, filling the first few days of the month with liveliness and levity. But from September 5 to October 22, Mars will plunge into Virgo and your twelfth house of fantasy, hidden agendas and closure. An intense and possibly clandestine attraction could heat up quickly. While you may be absolutely taken by someone, you might minimize the downsides or choose to disregard a few red flags. Be careful not to idealize OR demonize people: This is a fallible mortal, just like you, whose flaws you’ll discover in due time.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

If you’re weathering a breakup or a recent bumpy patch, you could still have some lingering anger and hurt to muddle through. Don’t force yourself to put on a happy face, but do take care not to cast yourself as a victim in the storyline. Even if you WERE betrayed, it won’t empower you to throw yourself a pity party. Instead, focus on healing and identifying the underlying patterns that may have been revealed through this tough situation. Give yourself space to grieve—but don’t wallow. Treat yourself with kid gloves and indulge in a lot of restorative self-care.

Pump up the pampering even more when Venus joins Mars in Libra from September 19 to October 14. At this point, you might just want to take a little dating sabbatical if the pressure feels too intense. For couples, this is a good time to plan a romance-fueled escape for two. If you’ve been stuck on the same issues, heal your conflicts with the help of a skilled therapist or coach—someone who can help you move past this same-old fight and develop greater insight. Should you decide to part ways with a long-term partner, do so with love and gratitude for the time you shared. Sometimes relationships just run their course. This is a powerful time to identify your own dating patterns and to call in a soulmate. Get yourself in the right mindset to attract this person by treating yourself as well as you’d want any adoring partner to.

Opportunity Days:

September 9: Sun-Pluto trine

You’ve been holding on to resentment and didn’t even realize it. Today, these unconscious blind spots clear up, and you’re able to forgive and move on. A major emotional burden lifts, and an important family relationship, possibly with your mother, transforms.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 12: Venus-Saturn trine

Don’t expect someone to intuitively know what you want. Speak up and make your desires for the future clear. Chances are, you’ll discover you’re on the same page!

September 18: Venus-Uranus trine

Sparks could fly with a friend, or you might meet someone through mutual acquaintances. Couples should mix up the flow by doing things without each other if you’ve been too much of a unit. Autonomy is sexy.

September 20: Virgo new moon

Endings can also be beginnings. This new moon in your house of transitions helps you filter out what no longer serves you, paving the way for a fresh start. A guardian-angel type could also open doors. Pay attention to signs and serendipities guiding you onto the right path. If things are easy, that’s a universal nod; if everything is a struggle, take that as a cue to correct course.

September 28: Pluto retrograde ends

Transformational Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in your sensitive fourth house. Home and family matters experienced some big changes, and your emotions have gone through the ringer. Now that you’ve processed all those deep feelings, you can move forward with clarity, especially around the topics of real estate, cohabitation and children.

Challenge Days:

September 5: Sun-Neptune opposition

The stars have a high gullibility factor today, so don’t believe everything (or, really, anything) you hear. Do a background check to make sure things add up. Take adequate time to get to know people before giving them your trust.

September 13: Sun-Saturn square

One minute you’ve got all the subtlety of a sledgehammer; the next, you’re speaking in riddles. Mixed messages abound today, so cut through the BS by giving straight answers. Don’t play into the double talk by tap-dancing around important topics.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 28: Jupiter-Uranus opposition

With indie-spirited Jupiter and Uranus making their second opposition this year (the first was March 3), you’re in no mood to be tied down! You’re craving adventure and variety. You’ll even need more breathing room with a longtime lover. A steady partner could start to act unpredictable, and a relationship might undergo through a period of questioning. Maybe this is what you need to be 100 percent sure it’s the right match?

MONEY & CAREER:

A quiet and contemplative September is in store, at least for the first three weeks of the month. The Sun has decamped to Virgo and your twelfth house of closure, prompting internal reflection and soul-searching. Take this sleepy solar spell to get back in touch with your feelings, trying your hand at meditation or free-writing. Simple activities that involve cathartic release could prompt serious revelations. If you’ve been frustrated at your current gig and feel stuck, let your search meander off the beaten path.

With communication planet Mercury and passionate Mars powering down in this same restful zone of your chart (Mercury from September 10 to 30; Mars from September 5 to October 22), you next job opportunity could materialize from out of the ether, and it might be wildly different from what you expected. Go with the flow during this malleable phase, staying receptive to new possibilities. Remember, Libra: You can’t create space for what’s to come until you release what no longer serves you.

On September 6, a full moon in Pisces activates your systematic sixth house, spotlighting your well-being and overall efficiency. Dedicate yourself to a regular fitness regimen, not just spurts of activity here and there. Declutter and delegate, and don’t be surprised when your energy levels soar once you have proper help in place. Once the Sun swings into Libra for a month on September 22, you’ll be so glad to have a clear space to launch exciting new initiatives. Your birthday goals deserve that springboard!

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Warning: Tempers could flare on September 28, when excessive Jupiter in your sign opposes radical Uranus in your seventh house of relationships. You might want to make a fast jailbreak from a claustrophobic contract or a job that’s stifling your self-expression. Just as you’re about to ink a deal, you could get a major case of the jitters. Easy does it under these impulsive skies. While you might downshift a little, you don’t need to pull the emergency brake just because you’re having a strong reaction. Handle interpersonal matters carefully. You could be tempted to argue for the sake of proving your point or to dump your stress on an undeserving person. The short-term relief will morph into regret soon enough. Your energy is better served elsewhere, so choose your battles. Let people speak their minds and then, if you must, agree to disagree. Stay true to your ambitions, Libra, and don’t let the naysayers try to steer you off your chosen path.

Opportunity Days:

September 2: Mars-Uranus trine

Go-getter Mars and innovator Uranus join forces, bringing an exciting contract, collaboration or opportunity to join forces with a kindred spirit. Get ready to act fast: There may not be much time to think it over.

September 6: Pisces full moon

An assistant or employee could suddenly resign—or you may let this person go. You might also suddenly leave a job or a volunteer post. Make room for a better match! Get organized and embark on a major decluttering mission.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 10-30: Mercury in Virgo

Foggy-headed much? Mental Mercury in your hazy twelfth house makes it hard to focus. Take a break and do some right-brained creative work. With your subconscious activated, you could make a vision board, meditate or just power down. Your dreams might be rich and filled with important messages.

September 30-October 17: Mercury in Libra

The communication planet enters your sign, handing you the proverbial mic. Advocate for your interests; share about a solo venture or passion project!

Challenge Days:

September 24: Mars-Neptune opposition

Are there too many cooks in the kitchen? Stop trying to bring everyone to consensus today. Let them figure it out on their own for once. By the same token, you may find yourself torn between the demands of the office and home. Shield your field as best you can and take measured steps. Be the calm eye in the middle of the storm, and trust that things will come together on their own.

September 28: Jupiter-Uranus opposition

Freedom-seeking Jupiter in your sign opposes claustrophobic Uranus in your partnership house, inspiring you to throw off any shackles. This is the second of two rare face-offs (the first was March 3) this year, which have shaken up any stagnant relationships or exposed where someone is holding you back. While you may be ready to break free, don’t throw the baby out with the bathwater. Maybe there’s a way you can still collaborate under different terms.

Love Days: 2, 8

Money Days:14, 23

Luck Days: 12, 21

Off Days: 20, 10

See All Signs