“Behold!,” which has applied for nonprofit status, is the brainchild of Ruth J. Abram, the historian who founded the Lower East Side Tenement Museum in New York in 1968 and is credited with forging new conceptual museum ground by telling the stories of immigrant families within an original setting.

Drawing lessons from the Foxfire project, which recorded the folk traditions of southern Appalachia, “Behold! New Lebanon” wants to “create a record of people who are inventing how to live in the countryside,” said Ms. Abram, who started off as a weekender here, drawn by the heritage of Mount Lebanon, the headquarters of the Shaker community in the United States. (It is now a museum.) But like many small rural towns, New Lebanon has suffered from steady depopulation and economic decline. Over the past decade, the supermarket, a pizza parlor, a gas station, a beloved coffee shop and three restaurants have closed.

“I kept hearing, ‘This used to be a great town, but ...,’ ” said Ms. Abram, who went on a listening tour of sorts, asking residents, “What do you know how to do that people in urban centers and suburbia don’t know?” She met people like Ms. Eigenbrodt, a respected hunter, who one-upped the farm-to-table food movement in a single breath: “It’s bed to table,” she said. “It’s get up, track the deer, shoot it, dress it, drag it, hang it, skin it, cut it, cook it. It’s about as organic as you’re going to get.”

Local officials see “Behold!” as a community development project that can draw tourists — not an abundant species here. “I probably could count them on two hands,” said Kenneth J. Flood, the Columbia County commissioner for planning and economic development. New Lebanon is eager for a slice of the Hudson Valley tourism market, which is currently $3.15 billion, providing $207 million in local tax revenue, said Ross D. Levi, vice president for marketing initiatives for the Empire State Development Agency.

The museum project has already raised about $55,000, Ms. Abram said. Tickets are $15 to $25 daily, and $40 for a weekend, including events like “Hitching the Horse to the Plow,” “Auctioneering 101” and “Surviving in the Wild.” (Take mosquito repellent.)

Brian Depew, the executive director of the Center for Rural Affairs, a nonprofit policy organization in Lyons, Neb., says that communities like New Lebanon are challenging a tendency to think of rural areas “in a crisis frame.” Between 2010 and 2012, rural counties as a whole declined in population for the first time, according to the Economic Research Service at the United States Department of Agriculture. Endeavors that emphasize contemporary artisanship, Mr. Depew said, may “allow communities to take control of how the world sees them.”

The longtime plan of having small towns promote themselves as “the birthplace of somebody famous, or the material culture of the past, can be a dangerous strategy that can make a rural population look not viable in the present,” said Kathryn Marie Dudley, a professor of American studies and anthropology at Yale, who has studied rural decline.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

William R. Ferris, former chairman of the National Endowment for the Humanities, and a historian at the Center for the Study of the American South at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, observed that “travelers are increasingly hungry for the architecture, the foods, the sounds that make America America.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“These towns are struggling,” he added, “but within them you can see the seeds of a cultural and economic revival.”

In Green River, Utah (population 953), a group of Auburn University design and architecture graduates and former AmeriCorps/Vista volunteers started the nonprofit Epicenter in 2009 (motto: “Rural & Proud”). They have restored 14 houses and run school arts programs and sponsor a “frontier fellowship” for artists in residence.

In Reedsburg (population 9,000), between Chicago and Minneapolis, Donna Neuwirth, 60, and Jay Salinas, 55, are urban transplants who started as farmers but went beyond food, creating the nonprofit Wormfarm Institute to develop what they call a regional culture-shed. The Fermentation Fest — which includes artist-designed farm stands, a drive with scenic overlooks of art installations in fields, and opera performed in a hay wagon — drew 12,000 people last October.

“The word ‘culture’ is embedded in the word ‘agriculture,’ ” Ms. Neuwirth said. “We hope to bring it all back.”

Ms. Abram considers “Behold! New Lebanon” a museum in the classical sense — “a place of the Muses.” But even she admits that it is “a great experiment.”

Though New Lebanon lies within the orbit of Tanglewood — the summer home of the Boston Symphony Orchestra and a mecca for evening picnickers bearing candelabra — it lacks the charming, Norman Rockwell-style Main Street of nearby Stockbridge, Mass. “We’ve been bouncing off the bottom here,” said Howard Commander, owner of the Lebanon Valley Speedway, a drag strip on the “Behold!” tour.

Deep in the fields and forests, other residents are embracing their roles as country guides with Shaker-like precision, despite an initial anxiety about “being turned into a museum exhibit,” as one put it. Alex Olchowski, 38, who taught himself how to grow hops, plans to show the elegant vines of his maiden harvest. On the Abode Farm, Evan Thaler-Null and Sarah Steadman, both 23, will show visitors how they cultivated seven acres of vegetables, using two Belgian draft horses, Lou and Belle. Mr. Null enjoys the partnership with a working animal, but even more, the silence. “You can actually hear the soil, how stony or gravelly it is,” he said.

On a recent afternoon, Schuyler and Colby Gail, the married proprietors of Climbing Tree Farm were bushwhacking through woodland thickets to check up on their rare Mulefoot hogs, which forage freely, dining on grubs, nuts and other wild fare.

Mr. Gail, 34, said he considers raising a happy, healthy, 400-pound heritage hog with a sculptural physique a form of art. “It involves a lot of problem-solving,” he said. “We put in a lot of extra effort to create something beautiful.”