Photo

This article is part of the Opinion Today newsletter. You can sign up here to receive more briefings and a guide to the section daily in your inbox.

The debate over tax policy is going to become more intense this week. My column today tells a story from a half-century ago — about a man named George Romney, who voluntarily turned down a lot of money — as a way of introducing the debate.

Taxes will become a focus because Congress returns today from its summer recess, with its Republican leaders and President Trump desperate for a legislative win. Having failed on health care policy, they’ve decided that a tax overhaul is their new goal. Later today, Trump is scheduled to meet at the White House with the so-called Big Six, a group of top administration officials and congressional leaders working on tax policy.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In the coming weeks, you may sometimes find the subject to be mind-numbingly complicated. It’s tax policy, after all. But the core of the issue isn’t so complicated. The two overriding questions are:

Will Trump and Congress pursue tax reform — that is, a simpler tax code, which has the potential to lift economic growth — or will they merely go for a tax cut? And if they choose the tax cut, will most of the benefits flow to the affluent?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

So far, unfortunately, the early signs point to a relatively straightforward tax cut that mostly benefits the wealthy. For more on that subject, I recommend Chye-Ching Huang and Howard Gleckman (both here and here). In The Times recently, Sarah Anderson debunked some myths about corporate taxes, and the Editorial Board offered an overview.