Although I did not make a big fuss when it came out, I remain beyond thrilled with my third book, the New York Times bestseller, Paleo Cooking from Elana’s Pantry. This labor of love is the culmination of almost a decade of cooking simple, healthy, and most important, tasty food for family, friends and the millions of people that read my blog.

While there have been a flood of Paleo cookbooks that hit the market in the last year, my readers have told me that a couple of things set the recipes in this book apart from others. First, simplicity. My recipes use as few ingredients as possible. No long lists of different flours! As a busy mother of two boys I don’t have time to waste, and I know you don’t either.

Second, the recipes are fail safe. All of the recipes in this book (as well my others) are professionally tested by a paid recipe tester, that is, after they are tested by me. After I perfect a recipe, it is tested by paid assistants who are not professional chefs (to make sure that beginner cooks can understand and make it) then off to the professional tester my recipes go! I’ve never discussed this before, but I thought you would like a bit of detail on the “making of” my books. The recipes work because I work them over, and then a couple of other people do too!

Additionally, my recipes are healthy. My third book Paleo Cooking from Elana’s Pantry has more than 90 recipes –all are gluten-free, grain-free, dairy-free, and nightshade-free! Of those recipes more than 60 are nut-free as well. After writing my first book, The Gluten-Free Almond Flour Cookbook, I wanted to write a book that would be more inclusive of people with different allergies, that is why more than two-thirds of the recipes in Paleo Cooking from Elana’s Pantry are free of nuts. With everything from Paleo Pad Thai to Paleo Shepherd’s Pie, you’ll find fantastically tasty easy dinners as well as simple, easy desserts such as these adorable Upside-Down Apple Tartlets.

Print Recipe Upside-Down Apple Tartlets Serves: 8 Ingredients Crust

2 cups blanched almond flour (not almond meal)

½ teaspoon celtic sea salt

¼ cup coconut oil, at room temperature

¼ teaspoon vanilla stevia

Filling

6 large apples, peeled, cored, and sliced , and cut into ¼-inch slices

1 cup apple juice

1 tablespoon freshly squeezed lemon juice

2 tablespoons arrowroot powder

1 tablespoon ground cinnamon Instructions Preheat oven to 350° and place eight 1-cup wide mouth Mason jars on a large baking sheet To make the crust, pulse together almond flour and salt in a food processor Add coconut oil and stevia and pulse until the mixture forms a ball Transfer dough to a piece of parchment paper and place in freezer for 20 minutes To make filling, toss apples, apple juice, lemon juice, arrowroot powder, and cinnamon in a large bowl to combine Transfer apples to Mason jars so that each one is overfull Divide remaining juice from the bottom of the bowl between the jars Remove dough from freezer, place between 2 pieces of parchment paper generously dusted with almond flour Roll out the dough ¼-inch thick and remove top sheet of parchment Use top of a wide-mouth Mason jar to cut out 8 circles of dough Place one on top of each apple-filled Mason jar Bake for 40 to 50 minutes, until the juices are bubbling and the crust is golden brown Serve the tartlets hot out of the oven with coconut whipped cream

While I put my heart and soul into writing Paleo Cooking from Elana’s Pantry, I did next to nothing to promote it. Why? First, I’m much better off staying home and sticking to my health routine than I am going on the road. Although I haven’t mentioned it here, I’m also really shy, and a much better writer than shmoozer. I don’t do well in big groups of people and get a bit overwhelmed. In fact, I’m pretty bad at networking and self-promotion. Finally, the summer the book came out I moved my family to our new house and threw a Bar Mitzvah for my younger son. This book, my third, got lost in the mix of all my family endeavors.

So, as we Jews say, this is my little spiel for this cookbook, which although a New York Times bestseller, received little of my attention (and promotion) after its creation. I hope you enjoy this recipe for Paleo Upside-Down Apple Tartlets, which gives you a little peak into Paleo Cooking from Elana’s Pantry!

I’m often asked why we use a small format for my cookbooks. I intentionally ask my publisher, Random House, to make the books small so that they are inexpensive and easy for people to afford. Of course, this cuts down my profit margin, but it saves you money and this smaller format also saves trees. Thankfully, the book is very affordable –it’s usually sold on amazon for somewhere around $12.00 (sometimes a bit less, sometimes a bit more, amazon sets the price, and I have no control over that).

My goal is not to sell books. My goal is to help people. That’s why there are 800 free recipes on my website for all of you to enjoy! I advise you to try the free recipes first, rather than buying my book. If you love them and get through them all, the books are waiting for you!