The Mediterranean diet that participants in the new study were told to follow differs in some respects from the advice people generally get about healthy eating. It allows people to eat as many nuts and eggs and even as much chocolate as they want, as long as it is chocolate with more than 50 percent cocoa. It permits unlimited consumption of fish, seafood, whole-grain cereals and low-fat cheese.

It also lays out what people following the diet need to eat: olive oil, used in abundance on salads and cooked vegetables. At least two servings a day of vegetables, with at least one of those servings in the form of a salad. At least three servings a day of fresh fruit. Legumes, which include garbanzo beans, lentils, soybeans and peas, at least three times a week. Fish or seafood three times a week, with at least one meal of a fatty fish like salmon, tuna or sardines. A sauce made with tomatoes, garlic and onions simmered in lots of olive oil at least twice a week. The sauce can go on pasta, rice or vegetables. Those who drink wine can have it with meals, at least seven glasses a week.

Video

Of course, there are also foods to avoid or consume in limited quantities. They include cream, butter, margarine, pâté, lunch meats, French fries, potato chips, sugared sodas or other drinks with sugar added, as well as pastries and baked goods like cakes, cookies and doughnuts. Try to steer clear of what the researchers call “industrial desserts,” which they defined as puddings, custards and other desserts that are not homemade. Eat white meat like chicken or turkey without the skin instead of red meat or processed meats like sausages.

Worried about gaining weight with all the oil and nuts? Never fear, the researchers say. They report that studies show people do not gain weight when they add those foods, probably because they make people feel full so they eat less of other things. In fact, nuts are so filling that study participants were advised not to eat them at dinner. The concern was that if they ate nuts they would skimp on other foods. The participants assigned to a Mediterranean diet did not gain or lose weight.

As to which ingredients of the diet are most important, the researchers say they simply do not know. The diet is a sort of black box: it is based on what people in Mediterranean countries used to eat, and the study adopted the diet as a whole to establish whether that combination of foods protected against heart disease.