As a landscape designer, I have an archetypal love-hate relationship with gravel. Just last week I visited a recently purchased house where the sellers had put pea gravel between the entry pavers to “dress it up.” Gravel was scattered everywhere, looking like a carpet strewn with tiny Legos, and walking on it was undesirably scratchy against the stones between which it was supposed to be neatly tucked. I thought: right material, wrong place.

Here are 10 things I wish all my clients knew about gravel:

1. Not all gravel is created equal.

Above: A gravel path’s edge is softened by planting that spill over into the walkway: ferns, euphorbia, and alchemilla. Photograph by Britt Willoughby Dyer. For more of this landscape, see Old-Lands: A Modern Welsh Garden, from a Bygone Age.

After you decide to add gravel to your landscape, the next question to ask yourself is: what kind? Each type of stone has its own distinct look and textural appeal, and its own purpose. Your selection will vary regionally, so I recommend the first step should be to visit a local stone quarry to see what is available.

2. Get to know the three most common textures of gravel.

Above: White sage, Century Agave, and decomposed granite create a composition in a Bel Air, California landscape by Terremoto. See more of this landscape in our 2017 Considered Design Awards.

After you settle on a variety and color of stone, you will need to consider size and texture: decomposed granite, crushed stone, or pea gravel?

In a nutshell: Decomposed granite (or DG, as it’s known) is a powdery granite that makes a fine texture of silt and little rocks. DG is a popular option for paths and patios. Usually yellow-gold and fading to tan in color and relatively affordable. Crushed stone is probably the closest to the typical idea of what a gravel driveway looks like. This material is also used for patios, retaining wall drainage, back fill, and grading. Pea gravel is tricky because its name has the word “gravel” in it, but some note that pea gravel is actually a small and smooth river rock. See Hardscaping 101: River Rocks to learn more.

3. DG may stick to your shoes or a pet’s feet.

Above: Concrete pavers are set in decomposed granite to create a permeable patio. Photograph by Matthew Williams for Gardenista.

My major pet peeve is that the particles (especially when wet) will hitchhike into your house, where it not only will create a mess but also can scratch hardwood floors.

4. Decomposed granite needs more maintenance than you might expect.

Above: A stabilized decomposed granite path in a landscape designed by landscape architect Christine Ten Eyck. Photograph courtesy of 2014 American Society of Landscape Architects Awards.

Install decomposed granite in layers for added durability, compacting each layer. Also consider adding a stabilizer product (a water-activated binder) to glue the tiny pieces together. While it can hold up for a considerable time, it does need periodic refreshing if soil muddles it or moss tarnishes it in shady spots. Last, you might also consider installing landscape fabric underneath to discourage weeds.

5. Most crushed stone colors range from gray to gray.

Above: In a Brooklyn backyard, designer Brook Klausing edged limestone pavers with crushed limestone dust mixed with gravel. “It’s a very modern look, but I tried to soften it with the gravel and plantings, like the ferns in the gravel,” says Klausing. For more of this garden, see Designer Visit: Brook Klausing Elevates a Brooklyn Backyard.

Depending on where you live, crushed stone comes in a variety of colors but mostly shades of gray. Size ranges from .5 to 1.5 inches and can be purchased by the bag or the yard.