Zodiac Sign Dates

Zodiac Sign Dates, Sign Meanings and Zodiac Symbols

Below is a chart of zodiac sign dates and sign attributes for quick and easy reference.

When I started my study of astrology, I found it very helpful to keep a chart like this by my side.

I'm terrible with dates and times, so having a reference chart like this one tucked in my organizer really helped me remember the astrological divisions. I hope this helps you too.

Be aware: Depending upon which source you consult, you are going to find discrepancies in zodiac sign dates.

Why?

I'm going to let Joanna Martine Woolfolk answer that question, because she phrases a lot better than I can. This quote is taken directly from her book:

The Only Astrology Book You'll Ever Need

"...dates are not exact. Some years the sun will enter or leave a sign one or two days before or after the dates you see published. This is because the Sun does not travel at the exactsame speed year in and year out. There are slight changes in its forward motion due to the position of the earth. Also, at certain times of the year the sun travels faster than at other times (for example, the sun is traveling four minutes faster per day in early January than in early June)."

Share















It's important to note the phenomenon known as 'precession of the equinoxes'. These are 30 degree divisions whose motions over generations have influenced the constellations. These motions of equinox precessions do wonky things to the placement of zodiac sign dates...at least it appears that way. For example, today Aries is actually found in the constellations of Pisces. But that doesn't fiddle with astrological theory. The heavens don't sit still, but astrology allows us a framework within which we can nail down our star-birth-date. Astrology assigns segments of the sky, rather than constellations which are visible, and also prone to transition. So astrology gives us the anchor that validates our zodiac sign according to the date of our birth.

All that said, please enjoy this chart for zodiac sign dates, symbols and meanings. Each sign has unique elements that influences that sign. For example, Aries is governed by fire and the planet Mars - whereas Aquarius is governed by the element of air, and is ruled by the planet Uranus.

Quick Reference Guide For Zodiac Sign Dates and Meanings

Sign: Aries

Dates: March 21 - April 19

Element: Fire

Planet: Mars

Sign Characteristics: Active, Demanding, Determined, Effective, Ambitious. Very clever and resourceful when motivated. Leans towards making impetuous choices. Would rather leap before looking if there is a lure of excitement or adventure. Uncomfortable with stagnation; hates to be bored. Requires deep belief or passion in order to avoid tendency to be selfish.

Sign: Taurus

Dates: April 20 - May 20

Element: Earth

Planet: Venus

Sign Characteristics: Security, Subtle strength, Appreciation, Instruction, Patience. Tends to be possessive. Finds it difficult to let go of 'the way things are' and consequently resistent to change. Requires a home-base, this is especially true with the family unit. Finds identity within the home. Appreciates hard work and the value that comes from it.

Sign: Gemini

Dates: May 21 - June 20

Element: Air

Planet: Mercury

Sign Characteristics: Communication, Indecision, Inquisitive, Intelligent, Changeable. A jack of all trades, but a master of very few of them. Hence, able to generate surface communication about virtually any subject. Quick intelligence, good at multi- tasking. Requires stimulation, variety and enjoys fast-paced situations. Logical, rational and usually a masterful instructor.

Sign: Cancer

Dates: June 21 - July 22

Element: Water

Planet: Moon

Sign Characteristics: Emotion, Diplomatic, Intensity, Impulsive, Selective. Difficulty letting go. Often feels the target of sabotage from others. Highly imaginative and emotional. Very intuitive. Follows senses rather than physical evidence. Imagines problems where there are none, therefor tends to worry without cause. Gifted with instinct and creativity.

Sign: Leo

Dates: July 23 - August 22

Element: Fire

Planet: Sun

Sign Characteristics: Ruling, Warmth, Generosity, Faithful, Initiative. Confidence and charisma often leads to natural opportunity. Takes great pride in accomplishment. Appreciates accolades and compliments for work well done. May have tendency to vanity. Recognizes the good things in life and wants them. Expressive and prefers dominant life-positions.

Sign: Virgo

Dates: August 23 - September 22

Element: Earth

Planet: Mercury

Sign Characteristics: Analyzing, Practical, Reflective, Observation, Thoughtful. Can be scrutinizing and critical. Appreciates the high integrity. Understand the true definition of value and quality. Disdains waist and excess. Prefers to work with small details and may sometimes become lost in them. Often relied upon to manage effectively. Highly intelligent and deft at problem-solving.

Sign: Libra

Dates: September 23 - October 22

Element: Air

Planet: Venus

Sign Characteristics: Balance, Justice, Truth, Beauty, Perfection. Easily sees both sides of an argument. Highly skilled at problem-solving and decision making. Knows how to be unbiased while offering spirited debates on beliefs, knowledge, politics, etc. Appreciates sharing amongst family, friends co-workers etc. Finds it difficult to be alone; works best in partnerships.

Sign: Scorpio

Dates: October 23 - November 21

Element: Water

Planet: Mars

Sign Characteristics: Transient, Self-Willed, Purposeful, Unyielding. Not easy to pin down or predict. Prone to jealousy and possessivness. Highly amorous with impressive sex drive. This drive can be expressed in vocation, beliefs sport, or relationships. Tends to be competitive, especially with themselves. Can be very critical with themselves. Very creative, artistic and imaginative.

Sign: Sagittarius

Dates: November 22 - December 21

Element: Fire

Planet: Jupiter

Sign Characteristics: Philosophical, Motion, Experimentation, Optimism. Uneasy with routine and stagnation. Requires stimulation. Imaginative and creative. Appreciates accumulation of knowledge and philosophy. Enjoys exploration and travel. Tends to be unabashedly honest. Hesitant to commitment, or finds it difficult to complete promised goals.

Sign: Capricorn

Dates: December 22 - January 19

Element: Earth

Planet: Saturn

Sign Characteristics: Determination, Dominance, Perservering, Practical, Willful. Easily accepts obligation and responsibility. Lives by a moral code which is often traditional and conventional. Skilled strategic thinker, able to easily problem solve. Often achieves success by sheer hard work. Finds difficulty with change, especially changing perspective if committed to a certain ideal.

Sign: Aquarius

Dates: January 20 - February 18

Element: Air

Planet: Uranus

Sign Characteristics: Knowledge, Humanitarianism, Serious, Insightful, Duplicitous. Original thinker, able to deftly move around problems with unorthodox solutions. Idealistic, and prefers equal opportunity for all. Tends to be the defender of underdogs. Philosophical and appreciates high spirited debates with others of equal intelligence. Can be unpredictable, highly opinionated and remote.

Sign: Pisces

Dates: February 19 - March 20

Element: Water

Planet: Neptune

Sign Characteristics: Fluctuation, Depth, Imagination, Reactive, Indecisive. Deeply intuitive, often lives and thinks in a different world than others. Dreamer on multiple levels (in goals and in imagination). Finds difficulty facing reality. Highly artistic and easily expressive. This is especially true in song and written word such as poetry.

I hope you find this chart of zodiac sign dates and attributes useful in your continued contemplation of astrology.

Keep expanding your knowledge, follow the links at the end of this page for more astrology symbolism and zodiac meanings. Thanks for reading!

Brightly,

Avia

Avia's Book Recommendations for

Zodiac Signs and Meanings