OVERVIEW:

You probably have a general understanding of how your body works. But do you fully comprehend how all of the intricate functions and systems of the human body work together to keep you healthy? This course will provide that insight. By approaching the study of the body in an organized way, you will be able to connect what you learn about anatomy and physiology to what you already know about your own body.

By taking this course, you will begin to think and speak in the language of the domain while integrating the knowledge you gain about anatomy to support explanations of physiological phenomenon. The course focuses on a few themes that, when taken together, provide a full view of what the human body is capable of and of the exciting processes going on inside of it. The themes are:

Structure and function of the body , and the connection between the two.

, and the connection between the two. Homeostasis , the body’s natural tendency to maintain a stable internal environment.

, the body’s natural tendency to maintain a stable internal environment. Levels of Organization , the major levels of organization in the human organism from the chemical and cellular levels to the tissues, organs and organ systems.

, the major levels of organization in the human organism from the chemical and cellular levels to the tissues, organs and organ systems. Integration of Systems, concerning which systems are subsets of larger systems, and how they function together in harmony and conflict.

Developed with best practices in applied learning theory, this course offers an active learning experience for any student in the form of pre-tests, ample practice opportunities, 3D interactive images, walkthrough videos, and other special tools and applications that will increase your comprehension of anatomy and physiology. Ultimately, your understanding of the material offered in this course will provide you with a solid foundation to explore careers in the health and fitness industries.