In September 2016, news emerged that Formula 1 was changing hands, with a proposed sale from CVC Capital Partners to Liberty Media. Despite a couple of hurdles—including the sport's regulator standing to make a hefty profit from the sale—everything looks to have sailed through without a hitch. On Monday we learned that the sale was final and that the new owners have made an immediate change, for Bernie Ecclestone will no longer run the show.

We've known since last year that Chase Carey would be Chairman, with Ecclestone staying on as CEO for the near term. Evidently near-term meant four months, because as of Monday, Carey is the CEO. Ecclestone has been made Chairman Emeritus, and according to a press statement will "be available as a source of advice for the board of F1."

Further Reading Formula 1 to be bought by US-based Liberty Media Group That advice comes from decades of experience, because Ecclestone is the man behind F1's commercial success. He consolidated the broadcast rights from individual races, negotiating on behalf of the other teams. Bit by bit, he took charge of everything, turning the F1 Grand Prix into the well-oiled machine it is today. The FIA was still the sport's organizing body and would still set the rules, but it gave Ecclestone the commercial rights. Tracks would pay to host a race and could keep any profits from ticket sales. But the rest—all that trackside advertising included—would go through his companies.

Local broadcasters, which it must be said were not all equally good, were gradually replaced with a traveling TV production facility. Luxurious VIP facilities rode in on the same 747 cargo planes, coupled with layers of security that kept the average fan well away from the cars and drivers, giving the sport an air of exclusivity. By 2005 the show was owned by a private equity group called CVC Capital Partners. Intricate—some might say murky—finances prevented CVC from its intended plan of floating F1 on a stock exchange, so instead it just sat there, reaping immense profits while doing little to invest in the business.

That period of chronic underinvestment is why so many have cheered the sale to Liberty. The sport might be in rude financial health, but many of the tracks and some of the teams are far from it. Huge sanctioning fees mean it's impossible to host an F1 race without state support (Monaco being the exception). Petrostates like Azerbaijan and Russia will pay $50 million a year to bring the circus to town. Meanwhile it falters in its traditional heartland of western Europe where the British Grand Prix loses money paying less than half that amount. There is no German race on the calendar for 2017, ludicrous considering the success of Mercedes and the concentration of German drivers in the sport. Are these events to go the way of the French Grand Prix?

Further Reading A rare look inside F1’s tech center If the early signs are to be believed, no. Carey told the BBC that "the foundation of the sport is western Europe. We want to grow it. There's a negotiating dynamic that exists, but we want a healthy relationship with our promoters."

Other changes that look likely are an end to Ferrari's $100 million annual bonus, a sweetener that keeps the Italian team in the F1 sandbox and away from any dalliances with prototype sports cars or the Indy 500. Shares in the company are being held aside for teams to purchase, at a bit of a bargain, too, though that's probably cold comfort to the smaller outfits on the brink of bankruptcy.

Carey is appointing a former ESPN man to take control of the sport's marketing, something that it has lacked until now. Does this mean a bigger push to capture some eyeballs in the US? We certainly hope so.

While we've got our wishlist out, a non-geoblocked Internet streaming option would be right at the top. It's 2017 and well past time.

Ross Brawn will be the sport's new technical director. He is the engineer who brought success to Ferrari, winning championships in a team bearing his own name above the door (Honda having quit right on the eve of success), and then with Mercedes, so he knows a thing or two about F1 cars. But even if Brawn comes on board tomorrow, the technical regulations for 2017 are fixed.

Further Reading Commercials are killing F1 on NBC This year's F1 season is going to look quite different on track. The cars are wider, as are tires and wings. They'll have a lot more downforce and mechanical grip, so cornering speeds should be much greater. I spoke recently with David Coulthard, who told me they should be much more physical and harder to drive, particularly since the drivers should be able to push their tires much harder. (The past few years featured tires that Pirelli was instructed to make, which degraded extremely quickly, resulting in races with drivers cruising far below the limit of adhesion.)

Everyone expects faster lap times, but it's far less clear the changes will result in better racing. More grip means shorter braking distances, and most overtaking moves are made during braking. And higher cornering speeds are all well and good, but wakes play havoc with front wings, so there's little reason to believe that the cars will be exiting onto the straights any closer than before.