There are a few questions I constantly receive, and one of the most common is how to label artworks in an exhibition. The truth is, there is no single standard format, though most labels include the same key elements. I have written a previous post on the subject, How to Label Artwork in an Exhibition. Below, I have expanded on some of the specifics, as well included more examples of artwork labels.

The most standard information included on artwork labels is:

1. The artist’s name

This one is pretty straightforward!

2. The title of the work

Depending on your preference, the title of the artwork can be plain, in italics, or bolded. Italics are often used to differentiate the title from the rest of the information, as well referencing english grammar rules for titles. The title could also be in bold as a different method of differentiating it from the remainder of the information.

3. The date of the artwork

Generally, the date of an artwork is the year that it was completed. Sometimes, if a work has been continued over a long span of time and the artist would like to acknowledge that, multiple years can be included (for example, 2012-2014). If the date of the artwork is unknown (usually for historical works), “circa” is included: for example, c. 1919.

4. The size of the artwork

The measurement of an artwork usually refers to the outer size of the canvas, paper, or other material that is the base of an artwork. Unless the frame is an integral part of the work itself, its measurements should not be considered the size of the artwork. The standard is to list the height, then the width. The depth, if applicable, would be listed third. For example, 57 x 46 x 3 inches. Sometimes, there is no specific dimensions for a work (for example, video work, or work which changes size depending on different installation circumstances). In the case of no specific dimensions, it is appropriate to list dimensions variable.

4.a The duration of the work

For durational artworks such as video or audio, this format is often used to list their duration: 00:00:00 (hours, minutes, seconds). You can also simply list 1 hour, two minutes, or however long your work is. It is not absolutely necessary to list the duration of work, however works of this nature are often catalogued in this manner.

5. The medium of the artwork

This seems straightforward, although sometimes it can be difficult to decide what should be listed and what should be left out. It is really the artist’s choice how detailed they would like to be. For example, you can list your medium as simply as possible (for example, oil on linen). You can include more detail, if you feel it is integral to the work (for example, gel medium, tea, sand, dirt, grass on found canvas).

6. The price or the credit listing

Should you be selling your work and you would like to include a price on your label, place it at the bottom. If the work is not for sale, you can leave this area blank. If the work is loaned, this is where you would credit the lender. For example, Courtesy of Cleopatra.

7. Additional information

Museums or larger establishments showing artists of historical significance often list further information on their labels. This could be the birth year and death year of the artist (if applicable), the museum’s own cataloguing number for the work, and a credit to the donor of the work if applicable.

Below are some visual examples of artwork labels:

For a loaned artwork:

Roy Lichenstein

Whaam!

1963

Acrylic and oil paint on canvas

68 x 160 inches

Courtesy of the Tate Museum



For an artwork for sale:

Paul Cézanne

The Card Players

1892-1893

Oil on canvas

38 x 51 inches

$259,000.000

For a durational artwork:

Joan Jonas

Double Lunar Dogs

1984

24 minutes

Courtesy of MoMA

Bruce Nauman

Think

1993

Two color video monitors, two laser disc players, two laser discs (color, sound), and metal table

Dimensions variable

Courtesy of MoMA

The original post on this subject How to Label Artworks in an Exhibition includes tips and ideas for physically creating your labels.

Whenever you visit galleries, take note of how they label their artwork. What do you think looks best? What do you find to be the most effective method for labelling artwork?