Whether your goal is to run a 5-K or to drop some extra pounds, in one month you'll be well on your way, with the transformed bod to show for it.

For all weeks:

Warm Up: 3 minutes. Start easy, progress to a power walk.

Cool Down: 3 minutes. Gradually dial it down to an easy walk.

Frequency: Perform running workouts 3-4 times per week, every other day

Cross-Training: Add a total-body strength-training workout and either yoga or Pilates on two of your off days.

WEEK 1

Get Outfitted

The two most important pieces of gear a runner needs are a supportive, high-impact sports bra and running shoes. Both can be found at your local running specialty store. Make sure they fit well: A poorly-fitted bra can cause upper body tension, which reduces breathing capacity and can make your run feel more difficult. The wrong shoes can give you shin splints, knee pain, and a host of other issues. It pays to get fitted by the experts for these items.

Week 1 Runs

Warm up

Run 2 min, walk 2 min

Repeat 7 times (28 minutes total)

Cool down

Finish with flexibility

Just five minutes of stretching and muscle release exercises after your runs is enough to maintain a healthy range of motion in your joints—and prevent tight muscles, which can lead to inefficient form and injuries.

Use a foam roller to loosen up your shoulders, hamstrings, quadriceps, calves, and outer thighs/Illiotibial Bands. Also take a minute to stretch your chest and your hip flexors.

WEEK 2

Breath Trumps Pace

Your running pace or speed can vary every day because it's based on a lot of variables: how you slept, your food intake, stress, your menstrual cycle, whether you went out last night or took it easy…you get the idea. The easiest way to run at the perfect pace every day is to run by the sound of your breath. Take the talk test: If you can't say the words to "Happy Birthday" out loud four times without gasping for air, slow it down. You should be able to hold a conversation while you run. Gasping for air and not being able to talk means the running pace is too fast.

Week 2 Runs

Warm up

Run 3 min, walk 1 min

Repeat 7 times (28 minutes total)

Cool down

Think About Form

It's normal to feel awkward during the first few weeks of running, even if you've run in the past and are starting up again. Start every running segment off on the right foot by thinking about good running form:

- Head is balanced over your shoulders and focused forward

- Shoulders are relaxed to allow your lungs to expand

- Arms are around 90 degrees and swinging like a pendulum from your shoulders (elbows close to your body)

- Hands relaxed and not crossing over your belly button as your arms swing

- Hips are under your shoulders and stabilizing your legs as they move under your body

- Feet are landing with short, light, quick strides under your hips

WEEK 3

Find the fun

The best way to guarantee running success is to finish with a high-five moment. When you finish your workout feeling as if you can go just a little farther, you feel a sense of pride, happiness and success—all of which lead to wanting to do it again and again. Running habits are created as the result of happy running moments, so try to keep running fun rather than pushing yourself to the point of exhaustion.

Week 3 Runs

Warm up

Run 4 min, walk 1 min

Repeat 6 times (30 minutes total)

Cool down

Work On Your Stride

A common mistake many runners make is covering too much ground with every step. That's a bit like climbing stairs two or three at a time—it takes a lot more energy and the impact on your body is much greater. Aim for short, quick strides and a turnover rate (the number of steps you take in a minute) of 180. To figure out your turnover, count the number of times your left foot hits the ground in one minute and multiply by two. To increase your turnover, match your stride to music that's about 180 beats per minute. You can download mixes at this speed, and others, at Podrunner.com.

WEEK 4

Listen to Your Body

If you start to feel aches and pains that don't go away after a few days, it's time for active recovery with lower-impact activities like cycling, swimming, and the elliptical machine. In most cases, minor aches will heal with a few days of TLC. Aches may also be a sign that you're pushing too hard. Ease up a bit, and you'll continue to improve without injury.

Week 4 Runs

Warm up

Run 5 min, walk 30 seconds

Repeat 6 times (33 minutes total)

Cool down

Ebb and Flow

Running is like life: there will be rockin' fun workouts and also runs that humble you. You'll make the most gains when you run based on how you feel on any given day. On days when you feel great, take advantage of the opportunity to push a little harder or run a little longer. That way, when rough days come along you can ease back on the throttle and still make progress.

WEEK 5 AND BEYOND

Continue to build your running regimen by adding 3-5 minutes to your workout time and decreasing your walking time every 1-2 weeks until your reach your goal.

Jenny Hadfield is the co-author of Running for Mortals and she answers running questions daily on her AskCoachJenny Facebook page and website, AskCoachJenny.com. Follow her on Twitter at @CoachJenny.

Print the plan and your 4-week training schedule!

Want a toned tummy? Get your best abs ever with our online personal trainer!