There’s a faintly improbable narrative in beauty currently, in which the modern woman is presumed to be popping constantly into blow-dry bars en route to a meeting or party, then emerging with perfect, professionally styled hair. Much as I recognise that “express beauty” establishments are booming in cities such as London, Birmingham and Liverpool, I still can’t imagine the average woman has either the time or the cash (some £20-45 a go) to obtain regular professional blow-dries outside of weddings, special occasions and three- to six-monthly haircuts.

I daresay many would like to, since there are few things as treaty or gratifying as a professional blow-dry – all smooth, soft and bouncy, with no stringy bits pointing wilfully in the wrong direction. This magic happens when an expert simultaneously lifts a barrel brush and pushes a dryer nozzle downwards over it; it’s a maddeningly fiddly and lengthy process for an amateur to conquer in the reverse reflection of a mirror at home.

Beauty: nude lipsticks Read more

Except Babyliss’ new gadget cheats the whole thing in minutes. Really. At first glance, it looks just like a sturdier version of the existing (and hugely popular) Big Hair model, but unlike its stablemate, Babyliss Sheer Volume Rotating Hot Brush(£79.99) is used exclusively on dried hair, and has more in common with the type of spiky hot brush mums used in the 1980s (mine was once pulled over by a policeman who’d spotted her using one to smooth down her demi-wave in the rearview mirror).

The advantage of this is that you can first blast your hair any old how, with any dryer and degree of inexpertise – just spritz with heat protector first: I like L’Oréal Professionnel Tecni Art Volume Architect (£12.30) or VO5 Volume Blow Dry Spray (£4.40). All you need then to transform it into a sleek style is to switch on and simply brush through the heated Sheer Volume; or, for much greater volume, press the button to rotate the barrel away from your head, lifting it upwards, and take it from root to tip. This deliberately slow rotation allows it to handle much bigger sections than others I’ve used, and makes it almost impossible to get hair tangled or stuck. It’s extraordinarily easy and fast (about four minutes for my whole head) and almost flawlessly mimics a proper blow-dry – and all for the cost of only two salon trips.