You gotta admit that the world is ugly. Although World War II was more than 60 years ago, the world today is still filled with destruction, but in different forms such as deforestation, animal massacres and also the robbery of human rights. The good news is that when there is darkness, there is light. More and more people, and organizations, have risen up to speak out against these destructive activities and more, with public awareness ads.

(Image Source: Ads of the World)

Today, we want to share with you 60 creative public awareness ads that not only attract people’s attention, but also make them actually want to give the issues a thought, encouraging them to act and to fight against the imbalance of the world.

While we enjoy the creative power used to create these ads, let us also share the ads out in order to spread more awareness. By doing this, you can be the part of the solution. And most of them really need the extrah elp. Get inspired, and let’s get some work done!.

Act Fast. The longer we delay in helping children with autism, the harder they are to reach. Act fast, act today.

Anyone Can Give The Miracle Of Life. Donating your organ to save a life is equivalent to giving birth to a baby, and we all know that they are both miracles.

Before It’s Too Late. Give our Mother Earth a chance to breath.

Brain Corals. 70% of plastic ends up in the sea, and they will never go ‘extinct’.

Censorship Tells Wrong Story. An amusing and cheeky advertisement which is done by adding some pixelation into play!

Consequences Stay With You Forever. A stunning advertisement with stunning effects. Nothing is more painful than regret.

Cure the Victims of Domestic Tests. Don’t let your quest for beauty kill the innocent.

Deal With The Consequences. The sea will take revenge on you one day, or may be even now. It’s really just a matter of time.

Desertification Destroys 6000 Species Every Year. We are all Earthlings, but we do not enjoy the same rights.

Dissolvent Pollutes Millions Of Litres Of Water. It’s never too late to make a change.

Domestic Violence. How long are you going to continue watching this show? Don’t turn a deaf ear to their cries for help. Speak out against domestic violence!

Don’t Buy Exotic Animal Souvenirs. If you buy them, they were killed because of you.

Don’t Kill Blockbusters. A funny but effective one, our blockbusters need financial support to continue their heroic life!

Don’t Leave Him Alone With Chernobyl. “20 years after the disaster, Chernobyl’s landscape remains as one of the barren planets. Even more damage was done to local residents, their bodies and minds alike. Please support us.”

Don’t Swallow Other People’s Smoke. Looks very disgusting, but this is what it looks like when you take in secondhand smoke.

Don’t Talk While He Drives. A powerful message on what could happen on the other side of the receiver, if you take his eyes off the road.

Each Minute Counts. Undoubtedly a striking one! And it perfectly expressed the message “Each Minute Counts”.

For Them, Anything Can Seem A Lot. Your ‘terrible’ meal could be the best thing that ever happen to them, so help them have a great meal.

Gambling Blocks Your Social Life. I guess even cards aren’t all that innocent.

Give A Hand To Wildlife. A masterpiece can always attract a lot of attention.

Help Before It’s Too Late. The message strikes through the heart, doesn’t it? This advertisement is a jewel.

Help Them Fast. “The longer you live on the street, the harder it is to get off it.” Literally.

How Does It Feel? Now you know how it feels when you are being hunted down.

Ignore Us, Ignore Human Rights. Cruel but true, speak out and help to win back what they should have: human rights.

Imagine It For A Kid. While most of us go on and on about how difficult it is for an animal to live on the street and fend for itself, let’s no forget that many children go through the same thing as well.

It’s No Longer Your Life. “While he controls your life, it’s no longer yours.”

It’s Time To Neuter Your Dog. Subtle, suggestive and cute! Check out the cloth the dog is wearing, simply angelic!

Keep The Ocean Clean. Do you want our future generations to think that this is how we take care of the place for them while we were here?

Killed By Our Rubbish. Yes, the masked man is doing the killing but who put the weapon in his hand?

Life is More Thrilling Than Drugs. There is more to life than drug-induced ecstacy. You deserve to experience them, drug-free.

Liked Helping Terceira Island. The evolution of the thumbs up.

Many of Them Disappear Every Minute. 15 square kilometer of rainforest disappears every minute.

Missing Children. The visuals are eye-catching but it was the words to the right of the tree that did it for me. If they are stil searching, there is always hope.

Nobody’s Immune To Breast Cancer. When it comes to preventing breast cancer, even heroes need regular checkups.

Not What You Seem To Be. Is it just me that this guy looks like the T-Bag from Prison Break? Nevertheless a great piece for fraud awareness!

Nutrition Fact: 0 Gram. “The only thing he should lack is hunger.”

Oceans Aren’t The Only One In Danger. Karma remembers everything.

Organ Donor Saves. Nothing is greater than saving the people’s life and giving them hope. Feel the gratitude on the woman’s face.

Our Water Is Thirsty. Took a creative twist to achieved the message, but I will say that this a unique advertisement!

Preserve Your World. The environment is ‘crying’ out for help and all we do is keep hurting it.

Rebuild The Children. Realigning our priorities with this eye-opening advertisement; even if buildings fall, we should always be there to help rebuild the children.

Respect The Planet. Of course we won’t ever think of vandalize such a beautiful creature, would we?

See You On The Road. Simple and straightforward idea, it works for me.

Seek Help. Schizophrenia can actually be treated; look out for the signs (or the people) and seek help.

Spending Christmas On The Streets. That’s no Christmas gift. We can do better for them kids in the Phillipines, can’t we, people?

Stop The Abuse. This is what animal looks like in those abusers’ eyes. This ad is bound to break a dog-lover’s heart.

The Earth Is Heating Up. Amusing or not, this advertisement drags a lot of attention!

They Also Need Your Help. People with disabilities deserve concern and coverage equivalent to those given to endangered species.

They Don’t Have A Childhood. You might be able to get them one.

They Will Pick It Up. It’s not too late for you to realize that you can save an animal’s life by not throwing rubbish everywhere.

We Can Help You. “Small problems may turn into big for senior citizens.”

We Transform Sadness Into Hope. Sadness can always be transformed into hope, so don’t give up. Creative, charming, positive.

What Goes Around Comes Around. Delicious? No? Then stop throwing rubbish into the sea.

What They Do Happens To Us. By blending 2 images into 1, we can actually see the consequences of pollution directly. Simple but effective!

When They Speak, We Listen. What should I say? Brilliant idea, impressive art, great execution. For sure this kind of advertisement is shared more often than less creative ones.

Workers Are Not Tools. What’s the difference between a worker and a human? None, they deserve human rights too.

Worst Predator Comes From Land. And this is what we humans look like in the eyes of a sea animal.

Would You Care More If I was a Panda? Every species on Earth should be loved equally, not just the cute ones.

You Can Help. The best way to let people know the situation is to let them see the truth.

Your Body Is Your Home. For smokers, direct visuals are the best way to persuade them.

Disclaimer: The advertisements listed in this post are handpicked directly from Ads of the World, all the credit goes to the site and the advertisement’s respective creator(s). Our heartfelt thanks to all the creators who crafted these creative advertisements to good cause!

Reflection

I was quite surprised that there are so many things that I wasn’t aware of, when it comes to what people who are living in the same world where we are are suffering through. For sure I learned a lot from these ads, and I think the best thing I have learned is to be graceful about my life. I hope you feel the same way too.

But gratefulness alone cannot save another life! So if you’re willing, share this post or share these ads out! Let everybody know about it, and together we can bring hope and salvation to those who’re experiencing difficulties. Be part of the solution, thank you.

Here comes more!

If you are seeking for more inspiration from creative advertisements, well, you have come to the right place again!