NATURAL GUT

This is the Rolls Royce of tennis string, providing top-of-the-line tension maintenance and feel for players of all ability levels. Made from individual strands of intestines (usually from cows), this string is also one of the priciest. Used by club players and touring pros alike, natural gut was originally extremely sensitive to water and weather changes, but modern coatings and treatments have decreased this risk. Even so make sure to keep it out of the rain and the trunk of your car.







MULTIFILAMENT

This is a type of string design where numerous individual string filaments, usually made of nylon, are wrapped or braided into a single length of string with a urethane binding agent. Multifilament strings tend to produce more power and comfort than solid-core or synthetic gut strings, and are a preferred choice for players with arm problems. Multifilament strings are designed to mimic to performance of natural gut without the price tag. These strings provide excellent elasticity when freshly strung but lose tension quicker than natural gut.







MONOFILAMENT

A type of string design where one string material, or a combination of materials, is extruded, or drawn through a geometrically shaped dye, to form a solid piece of string. Monofilament strings tend to exhibit greater durability than synthetic gut or multifilament strings of the same material, but have less power, feel, and comfort. The most common monofilament string, polyester based strings, have become softer (read: easier on the arm) as it has evolved. These strings are ideal for players searching for durability with control and spin. The lower elasticity of these strings requires full, fast swings to maximize their performance. This is why they are generally used by intermediate and advanced players. Polyester-based strings are known for losing tension fairly quickly.







SYNTHETIC GUT

The most economical of the various string families, synthetic gut is a nylon-based string, typically with a solid monofilament core surrounded by one or multiple layers of smaller filaments. This construction technique provides all-around performance by combining the improved tension maintenance of the solid core while improving the feel and playability by utilizing the outerwraps. This string's performance has improved over the years, providing dynamic response and feel enjoyed by players of various levels.







HYBRID

This is the mixing of two different types or gauges of string in the same racquet. Hybrid stringing has become popular in the last several years due to the rise of polyester-based strings. Since these polyester-based strings are so stiff, many players have mixed them with synthetic or natural gut strings to make for a more playable and comfortable string bed, while retaining much of the poly's spin and durability characteristics.





