Updates to Adidas Supernova Glide Boost 8

Featuring some of the most prominent technologies in the Adidas roster of shoes, the Adidas Supernova Glide Boost 8 wraps around the foot comfortably and securely. The underfoot experience is soft and responsive, and the platform is protective and supportive. This shoe gives the runner the incentive to perform in a more efficient way.

The upper unit of this running shoe has technologies that cover the foot in a gentle, but secure manner. The fabrics conform to the needs of many foot types. Air seamlessly enters the shoe to keep a well-ventilated interior in which the foot can rest. It’s a strong and reactive upper unit.

The mid-sole unit offers a well-cushioned underfoot platform for the foot. The foot is treated to a lightweight, responsive and flexible sole unit that doesn’t immediately lose structure. The strong compounds and components that are used here work well in delivering a smooth and stable ride.

The 8th version of the Supernova Glide Boost has an outsole unit that’s created to give the runner a durable external layer that’ll protect the shoe from damage and abrasion. Durable shielding is afforded by a propriety rubber compound, while another top-tier technology gives responsible traction on dry & wet surfaces.

Adidas Supernova Glide Boost 8 size and fit The Adidas Supernova Glide Boost 8 has a regular running shoe length. The men and women’s sizes follow the standard measurements when it comes to size. It accommodates medium-sized feet because of its medium-width construction. The upper is able to stretch well in order for many types of feet to fit well when wearing it.

Outsole The ADIWEAR™ is a rubber compound that’s placed in the heel section of this running shoe. It gives the runner high-level grip on the surface. It’s durable and hardy, lasting longer than the standard outsole rubber. It also doesn’t have much of a weight, so it won’t feel as if the material is dragging the shoe down. Continental™ Rubber is a high quality technology that’s been used in high-performance tires. Its purpose is to provide optimum grip on all types of surface conditions, even the wet kind. It prevents accidental slips. It gives the runner great control over the roads.

Midsole The adiPRENE is a foam material based on Ethylene vinyl acetate. This full-length foam gives impact protection and soft underfoot cushioning for a better and smoother ride. The technology itself makes the material resilient, so it doesn’t succumb to wear or breakdown. An EVA Cradle is placed just above the sole unit, right against the foot of the wearer. It supports the arch, giving a structured and stable underfoot experience. The boost™ technology is a mid-sole unit that’s made from the compaction of TPU pellets that cause the platform to be springy and more responsive to the runner’s steps. The unit absorbs the impact energy from running and then releases it back to the wearer for a more enabled & propelled running experience.