It's that time of the year again: time to pack your friends or family in the car and hit the open road. Planning your perfect road trip can be an exhausting ordeal, but we're here to help.

We've talked a lot about planning an awesome vacation, but road trips—where you take a long car ride and hit many stops on the way—present their own set of challenges (and opportunities). Here are a few things you should keep in mind as you plan.

Plan Your Route and Stops Before You Leave...

You know your destination, but deciding on your route and stops can really depend on your travel style. HowStuffWorks suggests you make sure everyone is on the same page before you leave to avoid being stuck in a car with unhappy passengers for 8 hours a day. If you have to travel with someone who's style doesn't mesh with yours, consider planning a shorter trip.

Advertisement

You'll save yourself a lot of time and stress if you map out how you're getting to your destination before you leave (obviously). These two services can help you plan.

Roadtrippers: We've talked about Roadtrippers before. The service uses Google-Maps based directions to lay out your route and helps you find all the stops along the way. You can now save trips and edit them too. With Roadtrippers you can also calculate fuel costs, time, and distance.

OnTheWay: Another app we've talked about before is OnTheWay, for iOS. The app can show you stops and restaurants along your route, but it can also help you find interesting things like museums, parks, and roadside attractions.

There are a lot of other apps you can use too, but these are two of the best. If you're interested in some non-road-trip-specific travel planning apps, you can see what else we think is the best.

If you plan on winging it with your GPS-enabled devices, weblog Travel and Leisure recommends bringing two along. GPS services aren't always 100% accurate and can show different routes to the same place. You might even spot a quicker route on one that's not visible on the other. At the very least, have two different navigation apps on your phone.

Advertisement

You need to investigate the weather beforehand too. One route may look shorter on the map, but weather can turn that short route into a long and hazardous road. You can check the weather for your route with the Weather Channel Trip Planner.

...But Keep Your Plans Loose

No matter how much you plan, you should expect things to go differently, says weblog Independent Traveler. Keeping an open mind and go with the flow. Road construction, bridges being out, and messy accidents are almost guaranteed to slow things down along the way. Try not to stress about it too hard and remember that it will probably make a good story someday.

It's also a good idea to keep loose plans because you never know when fun and interesting opportunities will arise. You could be driving by one of most popular roadside attractions along the way, so think about including "free time" in your itinerary.

Have a Solid Budget...

Driving somewhere can cost you less money than flying there, but it still comes with hidden costs, notes NerdWallet. For example, be sure to include food and lodging in your budget, as well as any fun stuff you plan on doing along the way. If you need a little help figuring out your costs, you can use a travel budget calculator. These have fields for you to enter every cost you can think of so nothing ends up getting left out.

...And Look For Ways to Save Some Cash

You might have a good budget in place, but that doesn't mean you can't still save. Going under budget means extra fun money, after all. Your big expense is going to be gas, and there are a couple things you can do to save:

Fill up your car the day before you leave. You already know where the best prices for gas are around you. This will give you a solid start.

Keep the weight of your cargo to a minimum. Your passengers' weight is set, but you can adjust how much stuff you pack in your vehicle. The lighter your ride, the longer she'll glide.

If it's time to get gas, Independent Traveler suggests you look for an exit with multiple gas stations and tons of fast food chains on the signs. The prices will be lower here because there's competition, and you'll be able to compare and pick the best option for you.

Drive the speed limit. Not only is it safer to drive the speed limit, but according to the U.S. Department of Energy, avoiding aggressive driving can save your gas mileage anywhere from 5% in town to 33% on the highway.

Your second biggest cost is food. Weblog Adventure Family Vacations recommends packing your food beforehand in a cooler. It adds weight to your car, but the savings are guaranteed to be more than the cost of the extra weight. The best options are things that can be pre-cooked and keep well or food that doesn't require cooking at all. There are a few other plus sides to you packing food ahead of time as well:

By packing yourself, you get to control the nutrition of you and your family. When you're on the road without food, you're left to forage the wilds of the truck stops for people fuel. That means eating fast food and tasty, but oh-so-bad for you snacks.

You also get the gift of time. By bringing your own food, you can eat whenever you want and your stops can be much more efficient. Plus, having the flexibility to keep going when you finally get the little one to sleep is priceless.

Make Sure Your Ride is Ready...

In the weeks leading up to your adventure, you need to make sure that your vehicle is in primo condition. This is important for you and your passengers safety, and a healthy vehicle won't break down on you in the middle of nowhere. Plus, according to the U.S. Department of Energy, a well kept automobile will use gas more efficiently.

Advertisement

Make sure all of the scheduled, preventative maintenance you need to have done on your vehicle is taken care of. If you're not sure what that entails, we've got you covered. Not everything requires going to a shop, though. There's plenty of basic things you can do on your own, like checking your vehicles vital fluids. Last but not least, make sure you have all the proper tools you need to change a flat in your trunk, and that you're spare tire is ready to rumble.

...And Pack Your Car Like a Pro

Okay, you've got your route set, your budget planned out, and your car ready to breath the air of the open road. Now it's time to pack. Make sure you have all of the important stuff first. We have a thorough list of all the essentials you should keep in your car, and those are even more important for a long road trip.

Consolidate and pack your bags to maximum capacity. It might seem more organized to pack all of one type of thing in one bag and another type of thing in another, but weblog Mom Aboard explains that you'll have more room for necessities if you put as many things together as you can. Just remember where you put everything. Also, make sure you pack clothing as efficiently as you can. Smart Packing suggests packing the clothes you'll need at your first stop on the top, and have an emergency set of clothing ready for easy access. And remember, only take what you think you'll need. If you pack light you'll save on gas and have room to bring stuff back.

Advertisement

If you want some more tips and tricks for packing, check out our list of the best clever packing ideas.

Stay Entertained on the Road...

Once you're on the open road, you need something to keep you from getting bored. Boredom leads to feeling tired, and feeling tired leads to you endangering the whole travel party. Anything from music, to books on tape, to classic car games can help keep the boredom at bay.

Advertisement

With iPods, streaming services, and satellite radio, your music will never dry up, but don't forget about the power of a good mix CD. If you can, make a CD of music everyone likes enough that they can tolerate it for most of the trip. You'll get sick of it eventually on the road, but months and years down the line, you'll have a flashback to a great vacation. If you're group is having trouble deciding who get's to be the DJ, play some car games and let the winner pick the tunes.

...And Keep the Kids From Driving You Crazy

Your kids probably have books, movies, and video games to occupy some of their time, but those things can only do so much for your sanity. Here's a few tips for dealing with the little rascals:

Instructables user lalaclassic suggests giving them a pencil and some paper. As simple as it sounds, your kids can get invested in drawing, writing, or coming up with games of their own.

Kids are messy—we know this, especially when they eat. Weblog Lookie What I did shows how you can use shower caddies to help contain their food. It's easy for you to hand back to them and they're washable, so cleanup is easy.

Keep your kids satisfied with a snack bag they get to pick out. Use a Ziploc bag, or something similar, and let your kids pick what they can take on the trip. The catch? It has to all fit in their bag and they only get to pick from what you offer them. This can be a great way to offer them healthy snacks while letting them feel like they have some control.

If your youngins' are acting out, you can use a dwindling treat bag to knock some sense into them. Use a small bag and fill it with something they really want, like candy or cookies. Every time they're bad take a little bit out. They only get what's left once you reach your destination.

Prepare For Your Voyage Back

When it's time to head back, there's a few things you can do to make the ride back just as easy. Safety is number one, so inspect your car for all of the usual maladies. It's also important to keep your car clean. Nothing is worse than cleaning the mountain of mess leftover in your car at the end of a really long drive. Independent Traveler points out it's easier to clean up before you head home and every time you make a stop.

Advertisement

Everything you check before leaving applies before heading home. Check your route for hazards and weather, find the cheapest gas before you leave, and try your hardest to stick to your set budget. The way home can be weary, but don't slip and spend all the money you saved just because you're exhausted!

The road trip can be an unforgettable adventure for you and your family, but it can also be a stressful experience if you don't take the time to plan. What are you waiting for? Follow these tips to get everything squared away and head out. The open road awaits.

Advertisement