Facial Toner

Mix together one tablespoon apple cider vinegar and two cups water. Moisten a cotton ball, and swipe the mixture over a clean, dry face to tighten skin. Don't rinse (the scent will dissipate quickly). Apple cider vinegar's natural alpha-hydroxy acids and acetic acid will stimulate circulation, as well as minimize pores.

MORE: 7 Ways to Make Your Pores Look Smaller

Hair Rinse

Mix two tablespoons apple cider vinegar with one cup water, and use to douse your hair after washing. Rinse thoroughly, and follow with a light conditioner. The acetic acid in apple cider vinegar will remove residue from product buildup and help you get shiny, lustrous locks.

Sunburn Relief

Mix together 1/2 cup apple cider vinegar and four cups water. Douse a washcloth with the solution, and apply to sunburned skin. Apple cider vinegar helps balance pH levels of skin, promote healing, and prevent blistering.

Razor Bump Remedy

Moisten a cotton ball with undiluted apple cider vinegar, and swipe over problem area. For especially aggravated bumps, try applying a light layer of honey to the area first, let stand for five minutes, then rinse, dry, and apply the vinegar. The anti-inflammatory properties of apple cider vinegar soothe irritated skin, and acetic acid softens skin to help ingrown hairs grow out more easily.

MORE: 10 Things No One Ever Tells You About Shaving Your Legs

Dandruff Treatment

Mix together a solution of equal parts apple cider vinegar and water. Massage into your scalp before shampooing. You can also mix one teaspoon apple cider vinegar into your regular shampoo and use to wash hair, massaging and concentrating on your scalp. Apple cider vinegar has natural anti-fungal properties to combat and mitigate dandruff. Plus, its acidic properties balance pH levels and restore the scalp’s protective acid mantle layer to ward off further fungal growth.

Bruise Healer

Soak a cotton ball or pad with undiluted apple cider vinegar, and secure it with a bandage. Leave on for one hour. For especially bad bruises, follow with arnica gel or cream. Apple cider vinegar's anti-inflammatory properties calm injured skin, and its acetic acid increases circulation and healing.

Bug Bite Treatment

Moisten a cotton ball or pad with undiluted apple cider vinegar, and dab on bug-bitten skin for instant relief. The acids in the vinegar neutralize the itch, while its anti-inflammatories ease swelling and its pH-balancing properties speed healing.

Foot Deodorizer

Mix one cup apple cider vinegar with four cups water in a basin. Soak feet for 15 minutes, the rinse and dry. Apple cider vinegar's antiseptic properties help to deodorize rank odor and disinfect feet. Plus, its anti-fungal attributes prevent and combat fungal conditions like athlete’s foot.

MORE: 11 Skin-Care Habits to Start NOW to Get Gorgeous Skin for Years to Come