Long lasting relationships are like plants that need constant nurturing. They are built with great effort and care. Just as plants need the right amount of water, sunlight and nourishment; relationships need commitment, team work and willingness to resolve conflicts. A key factor that makes relationships last long is frankness. Frank couples are like best friends, except that they are more than that.

They share everything with each other. They do not hide their inner feelings, whether they are good or bad. They are not afraid of sharing their insecurities with each other. They confide in one another, and stand by each other in both success and failure. They identify what they are doing right as a couple, and what needs to be changed. Once they have identified the pain points, they work as a team to fix the issues. They are constantly working towards improving the quality of their relationship. Because they create an environment of openness, they perceive no difference between themselves or their partner. Over time they grow into each other even more and become inseparable.

1. They develop a strong bond of mutual trust

Trust is the building block of any relationship. Couples that are frank to each other do not keep secrets. As a result, they develop a strong bond of trust. On the other hand, couples who hide things from their partners for fear of hurting them or not being judged end up harboring misunderstandings. A key part of communication is frankness. When partners open up, they come close together. As a result, they tend to stick together.

Advertising

Advertising

2. They understand each other better

It is no surprise that frank couples have a lot of feedback for each other. Sometimes it is positive and other times it is negative. But because they speak their heart out, they also understand each other’s likes and dislikes better.

This helps them quickly tune their reactions based on the feedback they get from their partner. For example, one of the partners might not enjoy how the other speaks to them when they are having an argument. Instead of holding it against their partner, a frank couple will talk it through so that they can quickly resolve conflicts in the future. Since they don’t hold grudges against each other, the quality of their relationship goes up.

3. They have a fulfilling sex life

Often times, couples resist talking about their sexual likes and dislikes to each other. As a result, they end up not understanding each other’s sexual requirements which leads to an unsatisfactory sex life. Frank couples on the other hand, clearly communicate to each other what they don’t like about their sex life and work together to make it better. When this team spirit is applied to sex, it only gets better!

4. They hold each other accountable

People in a relationship know more about each other than they probably do about themselves. Because they spend the majority of their time together, they cannot help observing each others’ behaviors, habits and reactions. Frank couples do not shy away from being honest to each other, and point out habits and behaviors that they find are detrimental.

Advertising

Advertising

For example, one of the partners might be stressed out due to multiple deadlines at work that need to be met. As a result, he might be procrastinating. A frank partner would not only express his concern over such behavior, but also offer a candid discussion on how to face the issue. Only frank couples provide such space to one another, but it is this team work the enables couples to enjoy a happy and stress free life together.