This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Have you ever wondered how your personal carbon footprint changes depending on the kind of journey you make? Different modes of travel have different impacts on greenhouse gas emissions.

Carbon dioxide remains in the atmosphere longer than other gases, so vehicles have a more harmful impact on climate change in the long term. Around a fifth of total greenhouse gas emissions worldwide come from transportation alone, “but close to 30 percent in most industrialized countries,” according to Nic Lutsey and Dan Sperling of the Institute of Transportation Studies at the University of California, Davis.

Transportation, which is responsible for 27 percent of the nation’s total greenhouse gas emissions, is America’s second-most polluting economic sector, just behind electricity. The Union of Concerned Scientists figures that amounts to about 24 pounds of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases for every gallon of gas. The group notes that “about 5 pounds comes from the extraction, production, and delivery of the fuel, while the great bulk of heat-trapping emissions — more than 19 pounds per gallon — comes right out of a car’s tailpipe.”

By measuring how much carbon dioxide is released into the atmosphere per person, per kilometer (0.6 miles) of travel, Indigo Park Services UK, a parking facilities firm based in Watford, England, compared the most harmful modes of transport to the friendlier forms.

The most harmful ways to travel

Its analysis found that a large RoPax ferry — a roll-on/roll-off passenger ferry built for freight vehicle transport along with passenger accommodation—is the worst and the most damaging way to travel.

These ferries — also known as “ro-ro” ships — are designed to provide maximum logistical efficiency and seamless transfer in loading cargo and passengers across waters, but these journeys have an alarming impact on the global environment — even more than a long-haul, first-class flight. The researchers found that these massive ferries belch out a whopping 0.85lb of CO2 per kilometer, per person, compared to just 0.04lb of CO2 for a ferry that carries foot passengers.

Here are the five most environmentally harmful ways to travel:

Large RoPax ferry: 0.85lb CO2 per km/0.6 miles Long-haul flight, first class: 0.71lb CO2 per km/0.6 miles Large gas/petrol car: 0.66lb CO2 per km/0.6 miles Large Diesel Van: 0.6lb CO2 per km/0.6 miles Large LPG (liquefied petroleum gas, or “autogas”) car: 0.6lb CO2 per km/0.6 miles

The cleanest ways to travel

A bicycle, manned by leg-power, has no emissions at all (0lb CO2 per person, per km/0.6 miles) and is clearly the cleanest way to travel. The researchers found that an electric car with solar panels also has 0lb of harmful CO2 emissions.