How to improve your programming and coding skills ? — To build skill in code, write code.

Solving different types of coding problems regularly improves your coding skills. Going through many practice problem is a great way to solidify your understanding of how the code should work.

But where can you find that type coding exercises ?

Here it is !

After some research I found 10 best websites that will help you to improve your programming and coding skills by solving tricky puzzles and problems in any programming language you experienced on.

Actually some of these websites also organize competitions frequently,so if you can play well with your codes then you can bag some cash prizes too.

Also Read : 50 Websites To Learn How To Code For Free

Improve Programming And Coding Skills :

The HackerRank Community is one of the largest learning and competition community for programmers. They have exercises related to Python, Java, SQL, C++, Linux Shell and lots more. You will be able to learn new programming topics and techniques by going through the challenges on HackerRank. Many challenges will also involve a competition between your bots and the bots coded by other hackers, so may the best hacker win

HackerEarth is an online skill assessment tool for conducting programming tests to evaluate developers. Supports almost all famous programming languages.

CodeChef was created as a platform to help programmers make it big in the world of algorithms, computer programming and programming contests. It is a not-for-profit educational initiative by Directi, an Indian software company and a global programming community that fosters learning and friendly competition.

Exercism is another tool to level up your programming and coding skills. Exercises are suitable for both code newbies and experienced programmers. You can download and pratice problems over 30 different programming languages.

Codeforces is a Russian website dedicated to competitive programming. They provide different mode of services like — participation in the short (2-hours) contests, challenge/hack other contestants solutions, ability to solve problems from previous contests for training purposes and many other.

Also Read : C Programming Examples Every Beginner Must Know

SPOJ (Sphere Online Judge) is an online judge system with over 200,000 registered users and over 20,000 problems. Tasks are prepared by its community of problem setters or are taken from previous programming contests. SPOJ allows advanced users to organize contests under their own rules and also includes a forum where programmers can discuss how to solve a particular problem.

CodingBat is a free site of live coding problems to build coding skill in Java and Python. CodingBat problems work great as homework, or for self-study practice, or in a lab, or as live lecture examples.

Project Euler is a series of challenging mathematical/computer programming problems that will require more than just mathematical insights to solve. Although mathematics will help you arrive at elegant and efficient methods, the use of a computer and programming skills will be required to solve most problems.

CodeEval is a platform used by developers to showcase their skills. Developers can participate in app building competitions and win cash/prizes. They can also solve programming challenges as a way to impress employers with their technical skills.

Topcoder is one of the world’s largest community of competitive designers, developers, and data scientists. Topcoder hosts fortnightly online competitive programming competitions—known as SRMs or “single round matches”—as well as weekly competitions in graphic design and development.

Google Code Jam is an international programming competition hosted and administered by Google. The competition consists of a set of algorithmic problems which must be solved in a fixed amount of time. Competitors may use any programming language and development environment to obtain their solutions.

LeetCode OJ is a platform for preparing technical coding interviews. Pick from an expanding library of more than 190 questions, code and submit your solution to see if you have solved it correctly. Supports 9 programming languages: C, C++, Java, Python, C#, JavaScript, Ruby, Bash, MySQL.

That’s it enrich your programming and coding skill with the help of these websites and also don’t forget to share it with your coder buddy.

And if you know any other similar programming and coding developing skill platforms, comment below.

Also Read : What Is Programming And What Do Programmers Do?