Most mornings, Brett Broviak rises at 4:30 for a walk around a nearby track before work. The winters in his native Indiana are long and cold, but Broviak trudges on. Occasionally, he steals a glance at his Fitbit to check his progress toward his daily goal: 20,000 steps, or about 10 miles.

advertisement

advertisement

McDonough says she heard from plenty of companies that were struggling to enroll even 20% of their workforce in wellness programs. She observed that while employees were sporting the latest consumer-health gadgets around the office, including Fitbits, their HR teams were expecting them to cast these aside in favor of a corporate-issued activity tracker: “Can you imagine asking an engineer to wear a janky old pedometer and write down their steps?” Today, McDonough heads up a wellness division that includes a slew of tools for employers, including webinars, dedicated service support, and dashboards where benefits managers can monitor how employees are performing. These programs are about more than just getting employees to walk. According to Park, they are aiding in job safety by helping workers track sleep and activity levels, as well as improving office culture by getting employees to meet their fitness goals together. (Fitbit excels at fostering this kind of community engagement.) In September, Fitbit added compliancy with the U.S. Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) to its arsenal, to assuage employers’ fears about the privacy and security of employees’ health information. That’s a big step for Fitbit, which can now court entities that are covered by HIPAA, such as health plans and some self-insured employers. The key to McDonough’s corporate sales pitch lies in the data that Fitbit’s research team is accumulating to demonstrate the long-term results of wearing a tracker—both in increased engagement in wellness programs and improved health outcomes. Retention, after all, is considered Fitbit’s Achilles’ heel; research firms have found that consumers lose interest in activity trackers within six months. Much of Fitbit’s data has not been released yet, but its business customers are starting to share their results. IBM, which gave out Fitbits to 40,000 employees over two years, found that 96% of them routinely logged their health data, including eating habits. According to Barbara Brickmeier, IBM’s vice president of benefits, employees who participated in the challenge reached an average of 8,800 steps per day, more than double the average of people who don’t wear pedometers. Brickmeier says she was floored to discover that 63% of IBM employees continued to wear their Fitbit months after the challenge wrapped up. “We know sometimes that there’s a ‘wow factor’ about getting something new and then interest wanes,” she says. “But employees were active and eager.” Stepping Up How Four Companies Have Used Fitbit Challenges To Get Employees Moving BP America The Million Step Challenge

More than 23,000 employees enrolled in the com­pany’s challenge, and nearly 2,000 surpassed 2 million steps within a year. Employees who reached step goals earned points toward eligibility for a lower-deductible health plan. Indiana University Health Healthy Results

After a three-month step challenge that began at the end of 2014, 40% of the 4,000 participants had decreased their BMI, 67% said they were coping better with stress, and 67% reported healthier eating habits. Kimberly-Clark Live Well Challenge

As an incentive for completing biometric screenings, employees were challenged to take 10,000 steps a day. Forty-seven percent of participants increased their cardiovascular fitness; 50% of them lost weight and increased strength

and flexibility. Appirio Cloudfit

Appirio’s health insurance company, Anthem, invested $20,000 to help the company kick-start a wellness program. Appirio bought 400 Fitbits for employees and used the data from them to negotiate a 6% reduction to the company’s health plan premiums. Some employers are going a step beyond health and wellness to use trackers to bring down insurance costs. Park cites Fitbit’s recent program with the San Francisco–based cloud-services startup Appirio, which bought fitness trackers for about 400 workers. Using data from the wearables, Appirio persuaded its insurer, Anthem, to shave about 6%, or $280,000, from its annual health bill. In the coming years, Park expects that more employers will leverage data from their employees’ Fitbits to negotiate with their health insurers. “We’re finally seeing traction with payers,” he says. “Going forward, we want to integrate more into the health system.” Some of the tactics used by corporate wellness programs have raised concerns with health experts, who fear that employers will only further alienate employees who have unhealthful habits or chronic ailments, like diabetes. LuAnn Heinen from the not-for-profit National Business Group on Health says that some employers are still struggling to engage the very people they most want to reach. “The employees who aren’t in shape might not want to go through one of these challenges,” she says. Many companies use leaderboards, for instance, which can lionize the fit but demoralize those with health issues.

advertisement