In modern times, gymnasts wear sparkly spandex, but it hasn't always been that way. At its root, the word gymnastics is derived from the ancient Greek word gymnos, which means "naked."

Although the practice has evolved since then, many of the modern gymnastic events such as pommel horse are derived from more practical tasks performed in the ancient world, like mounting and dismounting from a horse.

“Let us describe the education of our men. What then is the education to be? Perhaps we could hardly find a better than that which the experience of the past has already discovered, which consists, I believe, in gymnastic, for the body, and music for the mind.” - Plato

Some things never change, and having a solid base in gymnastics skills is still sure to carry over into many other aspects of life. If you're wondering how to build that base, we have over sixty weeks of workouts to help you master basic gymnastics skills like planche, handstands, and rolls.

RELATED: CrossFit Gymnastics: Bodyweight Mechanics Are Basics for a Reason

Meet the Coach

The gymnastics workouts are designed by gymnast and CrossFit coach Chris Lofland. A lover of all things athletic, Chris has been a competitive gymnast, diver, baseball player, CrossFitter, and Olympic weightlifter. While competing in gymnastics, he started coaching, and went on to open his gym, Elite Sports Training in North Richland Hills, Texas.

Chris believes everyone should do gymnastics at some point in their life to develop body control and awareness. He says, "Why start moving and controlling other things before you have learned how to move and control yourself?"

Click the Cycle Names Below to See Each Program

These workouts are designed to help build a strong gymnastics foundation for athletes of all levels and ages. The first cycle focuses on basic skills and introduces planche work.

The second cycle of gymnastics workouts will focus on level, planche, and handstand skills, as well as developing flexibility and joint strength.

Repetition is what makes a gymnast so good at their sport. The third cycle of gymnastics workouts focuses on repetitive skill work to help you achieve basic movements.

Gymnasts have not only amazing strength, but incredible flexibility. The fourth cycle of Breaking Muscle gymnastics workouts increase your strength and flexibility while boosting muscular endurance.

Cycle five of the gymnastics workout program focuses on more traditional style strength training. We will also build some foundational movements in gymnastics such as roll and handstand variations.

Photos courtesy of Shutterstock.