If you want to see your abs and get lean, vanilla chia pudding for breakfast is your friend. No fuss vegan, vegetarian and gluten free meal that takes 2 minutes to prep the night before. You can make a few at a time as chia pudding stays fresh in the fridge for up to 5 days. Then in the morning grab a jar and top with your favourite toppings like nuts, berries, fruit or coconut flakes.

I love chia so much, I add it everywhere. It’s pretty tasteless and is perfect for sneaking in more protein and fiber into the kid’s diet. I add it to their smoothies and sprinkle on oatmeal. I also add chia seeds to green smoothies, pancakes, fruit salad, muffins and even pretzels. Alex fills up small containers with chia for an energy boost on his run.

I like to make my vanilla chia pudding in Mason jars for easy breakfast on-the-go (for Alex) and no fuss cleanup. I usually top my chia pudding with frozen blueberries on which we stock up from local farms in summer. Full of antioxidants blueberries are also low in calories. My favourite nuts are pecans which I add depending on the mood.

Never ever skip breakfast if you want to maintain healthy weight and see weight loss progress. I make breakfast my biggest meal of the day. That’s why this chia pudding recipe works perfectly => 30 g of carbs, almost 20 g of fiber and 12.8 g of protein. I try to consume majority of carbs in first half of the day when I still need energy. In the evening I stick to lean proteins, greens and a bit of fruit as I know I will be going to bed shortly and all unused energy will store as fat. Yikes.

This vanilla chia pudding is very basic and can be altered in so many ways. You can definitely taste vanilla with a hint of maple. Feel free to use honey or agave nectar instead. Also adjust the amount of sweetener to your taste. What’s important in this recipe is chia seeds : liquid ratio. I like my chia pudding neither soupy, nor dry. Just like a real pudding. You can also use any milk: rice, soy, hemp, coconut, cow’s (more calories) etc.

If you like chia pudding, I have 3 other recipes on the blog: coconut mango chia pudding, chocolate banana chia pudding and lemon blueberry chia pudding.

Print Vanilla Chia Pudding Ingredients 3/4 cup almond milk, unsweetened (vanilla)

2 - 3 tsp maple syrup or raw honey

1 tsp pure vanilla extract

3 - 4 tbsp chia seeds*

Nuts, berries, fruit, coconut flakes for topping (optional) Directions Add all ingredients to a Mason jar or any container with a tight lid (I prefer glass), give a good shake or stir and refrigerate for at least 6 hours or overnight. When ready to eat, stir and top with favourite toppings: nuts, berries, fruit, coconut flakes etc. Adjust the thickness of a pudding with extra milk if desired. Also the amount of sweetener is up to a personal taste. Storage Instructions: Refrigerate for up to 5 days. Notes * For a thick consistency pudding use 4 tbsp chia seeds, for soup like consistency (pictured) use only 3 tbsp (my favourite). 3.1 http://ifoodreal.com/vanilla-chia-pudding/ The recipe and images are property and copyright of iFOODreal.com

Nutritional Info

Servings Per Recipe: 1

Amount Per Serving:

Calories: 308.5

Total Fat: 13.9 g

Cholesterol: 0.0 mg

Sodium: 136.8 mg

Total Carbs: 30.1 g

Sugars: 8.4 g

Dietary Fiber: 20.8 g

Protein: 12.8 g

WW Points+: 6