These crunchy potatoes are a perfect addition to a meal as a side or as breakfast potatoes. Spiced with Indian spices and crusted with rice flour.

These are made in a pan. No Baking needed! Rice flour adds a nice crisp coating. Change up the spices to preference. Use heat to preference. Use the crunchy method to make potatoes with any spices of choice.

These easy potatoes were going to head to the book, but luckily for you, we already have enough potato recipes there 🙂 Bring on the Aloo!





More Potatoes from the blog. all GF and Soy-free

Garam Masala Potatoes

Potatoes and Cauliflower – Aloo Gobi

Potatoes in tomato gravy

Cabbage and potatoes with burnt chili

Crunchy Spicy Potatoes

Allergen Information: Free of dairy, egg, corn, soy, gluten, yeast.

Prep time: 10 mins, Active Time: 35 minutes, Serves 3 to 4 as side

Ingredients:

2 tsp safflower or organic canola or other neutral oil, divided

1 tsp fennel seeds

1 tsp mustard seeds

2 cloves of garlic, minced

3.5 cups chopped potatoes, 4 medium, chopped small (1/2 to 3/4 inch)

3/4 to 1 tsp salt

2 Tbsp or more water

2 tsp coriander powder

1 tsp garam masala

3/4 to 1 tsp cayenne/red chili powder

1/2 tsp turmeric

1 Tbsp rice flour (brown or white)

cilantro for garnish

Method:

1. In a large skillet, add 1 tsp of oil and heat at medium. When the oil is hot, add mustard seeds and fennel seeds and let them sizzle and start to pop. half a minute. Use a lid if the mustard seeds start to explode out of the pan.

2. Add garlic and mix in. Cook for 1 minute. Add potatoes and mix to coat. Add salt and water and mix in. Cover and cook the potatoes for 20 to 25 minutes or until tender. Stir once or twice in between and add more water to de glaze if needed.

3. In a small bowl, mix the coriander powder, garam masala, cayenne, turmeric and rice flour. Add this to the potatoes and mix well to coat. Add 1 tsp oil and mix well so the potatoes are well coated with the spices and flour. Cook for 2 minutes so the spices and flour get cooked.

4. Taste and adjust salt and spice. Garnish with cilantro. Serve hot as a side with dals, rice or flatbread. or fill a sandwich with these potatoes, tomato slices and cheese, grill and serve.

For a quicker option: Use cubed boiled potatoes. Cook at step 2 for 2 minutes, and continue with Step 3.

