This is a list of the best Galaxy S5 apps to showcase the power and the beautiful screen that Samsung delivers. These Samsung Galaxy S5 apps will make you more productive, help you get better battery life, have more fun and do more with your Galaxy S5.

Most of these are free Galaxy S5 apps, but a few are worth paying for if you want the best possible experience on the Galaxy S5.

Read: Galaxy S5 Tips and Tricks

These are the best Galaxy S5 apps available after using the device for months. Great apps are essential to a great smartphone experience and are key to using the Galaxy S5 to its full potential.

Finding the best Galaxy S5 apps will help you do more with your new phone and can help ease the switch from iPhone to Galaxy S5.

Best Galaxy S5 Apps

The following Galaxy S5 apps are those I use every day. Without these apps I wouldn’t be able to use the Galaxy S5 as much as I do, and it would not be a valid replacement for the iPhone 5s I carry regularly.

With these Galaxy S5 apps I can use social media, browse reddit, communicate with co workers and track my slow progress towards fitness using S Health and the Gear Fit.

These are the best Galaxy S5 apps I can find to make this phone more than just great hardware and a beautiful screen.

Must Have Galaxy S5 Apps

The home screen is where I keep the best Galaxy S5 apps I’ve found. I keep several apps in folders so that I can still open these must have Galaxy S5 apps without going to another app page to open them.

I use the Galaxy S5 weather widget to keep track of my local weather and still use it to check the time, despite an abundance of other clocks throughout the device and on my wrist.

Samsung Kindle App – This is available for Samsung devices only, adding a free book each month in addition to access to your Kindle purchases just like the standard Kindle app.

Convo – This is a communication tool for our team which is like a private social network that replaces email. If you work with a team you need to try this out.

Flow for Reddit – Flow for Reddit is hands down the best Android reddit app on the market. It looks great and includes gestures to go back to the front page and upvote. If you use reddit and own an Android phone you’ll love Flow for Reddit.

Spotify – Spotify is my favorite music subscription service, offering access to the music I want and curated playlists for genres that help me find new music to listen to.

Camera – There is no fast access to the camera like on Control Center, so I still keep the stock camera app on my home screen so that I don’t miss funny photos or photos of our two dogs. I find no need for a third-party Galaxy S5 camera app at this time.

Personal Hotspot Shortcut – I use the Samsung Galaxy S5 personal hotspot almost every day, and this shortcut makes getting to it faster and easier than diving into settings.

Galaxy S5 Dock Apps

Phone – The stock phone app is the dialer I use on the Galaxy S5 and it works well with support for swipes to call or message someone.

Gmail – This is my go to app for checking email on the Galaxy S5. Although I typically have a computer or tablet handy I tend to read and reply to most of my email on the Galaxy S5.

Hangouts – I use Google Hangouts for real-time communication with my wife and co-workers. I do not use this for text messages though, because the app always tries to route through hangouts which can mean missed messages.

Chrome – Chrome is better than Samsung’s “Internet” browser, so it earns a spot on my Galaxy S5 dock for fast access.

Social Galaxy S5 Apps

Twitter – Although I use the Tweetings Twitter app for most things, I still keep the Twitter app handy to see retweets and for other random needs.

Facebook – Facebook is another Galaxy S5 app I use to connect with friends. I don’t keep Facebook installed on my iPhone because it can cut battery life, but I don’t have the same issue on the Galaxy S5.

Messenger – Facebook Messenger remains the best way to send messages to others on Facebook, delivering a faster and more fluid experience than the regular Facebook app.

Instagram – Although I am a sporadic user, I enjoy the Instagram app on the Galaxy S5.

Facebook Pages Manager – I use this app to manage multiple Facebook pages. This app is the only option and recent updates make it easier to use but it does not replace a web page yet.

Tweetings – Tweetings is a beautiful Android Twitter app that lets me check in on Twitter lists, offers handy notifications and a shortcut to jump to the top of my Twitter timeline.

Stock Galaxy S5 Apps

Google+ – I don’t use this very often for sharing, but I like the access to Google+ Auto backup and the cool Auto Awesome photos and stories that Google creates with my content.

Google Maps – This is the best Galaxy S5 app for getting directions, but I still keep Waze around for limited use when Google Maps doesn’t offer enough information.

Play Movies & TV – I buy most of my digital movies on Google Play, and this offers fast access to my purchases so I can watch The Big Lebowski whenever I want.

Drive – Google Drive is less essential thanks to the new Docs app, but it is still an easy way to share files between the Galaxy S5 and other devices.

YouTube – I use this to watch viral videos, but also to upload videos to the Gotta Be Mobile YouTube channel.

Photos – Instead of the Gallery app that Samsung includes, this is a good way auto back up photos and to see the new Stories that Google creates.

Play Store – The Google Play store is the place to download the best Galaxy S5 apps. Although there are other places to get apps, this is the safest.

Galaxy S5 Apps You’ll Love

S Health Widget & S Health – I use the S Health app to track my steps using the Gear Fit and to check my hear rate and stress level. When I remember I can also use this to track my sleep.

Calendar Widget – This is included with the Galaxy S5 and is the easiest way for me to see what I have going on during a specific day. It is better than a shortcut to the calendar.

ES File Explorer – When I need to access the Galaxy S5 Micro SD card and move files around I prefer to use this app over the included explorer app and other alternatives.

Dropbox – Although Google Drive is useful, Dropbox is the could storage service I use most. This is how I move files, photos and screenshots from the Galaxy S5 to my computer or other devices.

LastPass – If you need a tool to manage your passwords LastPass is the best option I’ve discovered. It allows me to use strong passwords for all my sites and services and keep them behind one ridiculously strong password.

Galaxy S5 Entertainment Apps

Hulu Plus – This is my go to app for watching TV shows on the Galaxy S5. Although it offers a wide range of shows i mostly watch the Daily Show on it.

HBO Go – When I want to watch Game of Thrones or True Detective on the go I use the HBO Go app. It’s also great for access to comedy specials that are easy to watch in small blocks while on the go.

Netflix – I’m still working my way through Breaking Bad, and when I do go to the gym I prefer watching episodes on the Galaxy S5’s nice display.

WatchESPN – I cannot use this with DirecTV, but it is the best sports app for the Galaxy S5 if your cable or satellite company is partnered with the service.

ESPN Radio – When I can’t watch I’ll use the ESPN Radio app to listen to games and other programs. perfect for listening to sports while driving or mowing the lawn.

Galaxy S5 Apps to Simplify Your Life

Adobe Reader – The Galaxy S5 includes apps to read PDFs but if you want to sign a PDF on the Galaxy S5, you’ll need this free app. It’s definitely a must have for anyone that deals with contracts, agreements or even permission slips.

Waze – When I need to get around really bad traffic, I use Waze to get the best route thanks to the data it gathers from all the users. When I am a passenger I can also report accidents or speed traps.

Smart Remote – I don’t use this to replace my Harmony remote, but it is how I change channels in the bedroom and how I control my in-law’s TV when I’m stuck watching something boring.

Google Voice – The Google Hangouts integration is still not far enough along to use as my main access to Google Voice. I use this app to check Google Voice calls, texts and voicemail. Google Voice rings all my phones when someone calls, so I don’t miss a call if I am using a different device.

Google Wallet – I love paying for groceries with the Galaxy S5. I use Google Wallet to switch between a business card and a personal card and tap to pay for groceries, gas, food and even vending machines.

Google Docs – When I need to co-edit something I use Google Docs as it is a free solution that offers easy mobile editing of shared documents.

Google Sheets – The same goes for Google Sheets. Although not as full featured as Excel in my experience it does handle my current needs well.

Galaxy S5 Travel Apps

I use these Galaxy S5 travel apps to look for the best deals on hotels, and occasionally on flights. I know that commercials claim you only need one, but I always end up checking all of them.

Although there are others, I normally check these and will use Priceline and Travelocity the most.

Galaxy S5 Shopping Apps

Beep’nGo – This is an app I’m still trying out, but it offers a lot of hope. You can clip coupons and store loyalty cards on it. The Galaxy S5 uses special tech to basically beam the barcode to the scanner, so even though most phones don’t scan your Galaxy S5 will.

Meijer – I use this app to clip digital coupons for my local grocery store. It’s way better than trying to print out coupons and remember to take them with us.

Amazon – I use Amazon to buy a lot of items since I have Amazon prime. This is easier than the web app, and when local stores are out of stock or no one can help me find something this app answers the call in seconds.

Best Buy – The Best Buy app show current specials, gaming information and rewards for My Best Buy.

PayPal – I use the PayPal app to check on balances for purchases I make online, and to check incoming payments for various projects. This is also a place to see receipts for PayPal debit card purchases.

Galaxy S5 Games

Trials Frontier – Although not as full featured as the Trials games on Xbox, this is a fun game. I wish it wasn’t as reliant on in-app purchases.

ShadowGun DeadZone – When I want to play a first person shooter on the Galaxy S5 this is still my go to game.

ctOS Mobile – I like playing Watch Dogs on the Xbox One, and this companion app lets me play against other players when I am mobile.

Destiny – The Destiny Beta just closed, but this is an app that lets you interact with your character and check your levels.

More Great Galaxy S5 Apps

Speedtest.net – I routinely check my Internet speed at home and on the go. at home I do this to see if Time Warner is actually delivering the speeds I am paying for.

Device Manager – This is where I can check the location of my other Android devices, and find them if I lose one. Even if you don’t have as many devices as I do it’s a must have app.

Ingress – I am not into this game as much as others, but it is a fun location-based game that I open up from time to time to waste a few minutes before a meeting.

Skype – A few businesses I interact with prefer Skype for communication, and it is how I keep in touch with my dad when he travels overseas.

Google Analytics – Google Analytics offers easy access to site data and other metrics that I often need to check while on the go.

Gallery – This is the app I use to check out screenshots and photos in galleries other than the main one that shows up in Photos.

Snapdragon Battery Guru – This free app analyzes your Galaxy S5 use and helps deliver batter Galaxy S5 battery life without limiting what you are doing most of the time.