XLH is rare enough that I was well into adulthood before I met anyone with my condition. I was contacted by an early incarnation of the XLH network. We arranged to meet in a big cavernous restaurant in a strip mall just outside Baltimore. I remember we ordered Caesar salads and large goblets of iced tea, and then someone ordered a glass of wine, and the rest of us did, too. We spoke of our lives, our careers. Some like me had chosen to have children; others had not. One woman I became quite close to, Elaine — a scientist by training — said she could not imagine having children because she felt she and her sister, who also had it, had suffered too much. She was a generation older than me and had not been given vitamin D2 as I had, so she stood about 4 feet 6 inches to my almost five feet. She laughed and said, “Even this makes a difference, and I can tell you my fashion statement is long skirts whatever the occasion.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

I don’t know that you could make an argument that we, as a group, have much of a culture in common, but we have had so many similar experiences. Most of us wore braces, spent our childhoods in and out of orthopedic units and had bone surgeries. We had learned that looks do matter to the world, even, or maybe especially, when people swear they don’t. Yet we had also had sweet, complicated and often triumphant lives. Meeting other people with XLH, I experienced a bond that was nearly primal and hard to explain. The one and only time my family and I encountered another family with XLH outside my support group — in a random encounter in a local Target store — we recognized each other as fellow XLHers instantly and proudly, and left each other in a flurry of high fives.

Lately, I find myself recalling when my children were small, and how XLH was so woven into our lives: dispensing their medicine many times a day, going from the small town where we lived in southern New Mexico to see the specialist in Albuquerque, and mostly the pep talks we all gave one another about how XLH would not stop us from being anything in the world we might want to be, how we knew people thought we looked weird and sometimes treated us badly because of it, but those people were wrong.

By all this I do not mean to say that the prospect of a cure for XLH is a bad thing, only that for people like me, it is a complex one. Certainly, the potential benefits to both individuals and society are real: less struggle and suffering for individuals and families, especially those not financially and socially equipped to overcome them, and perhaps the chance to direct medical attention and limited resources to more life-threatening and debilitating conditions.

But that does not change the fact that to be human often entails finding ways to make what appears a disadvantage a point of strength or pride. XLH does not shorten life-span. It makes walking difficult, and we XLHers suffer more aches and pains than most people. We also look different. When I was a child, this was the main reason I longed for a cure — so I could look like everyone else. Now it is the part of my XLH I cling to a little stubbornly, why I hesitate and wonder: Who would I be without my XLH? Who would my children be?

These are not questions I know how to answer, but I do know that the ambiguous feelings I’ve been having as the progression toward an XLH cure plays out on my patient listserv stem from issues many more people will grapple with in coming years. My son, Walker, an XLH patient, who is now in engineering school, keeps sending me articles about Crispr, the new gene splicing technology that allows researchers to snip and move even the smallest lines of genetic code, potentially allowing them to correct the smallest genetic anomaly. Recently, the novelist Kazuo Ishiguro commented on Crispr in The Guardian: “We’re going into a territory where a lot of the ways in which we have organized our societies will suddenly look a bit redundant. In liberal democracies, we have this idea that human beings are basically equal in some very fundamental way. We’re coming close to the point where we can, objectively in some sense, create people who are superior to others.”

What is a superior person? What might be lost in the rush toward creating one? It is highly unlikely we will put such technology away, but how do we ensure it does not create the kind of monstrous world H. G. Wells described in “The Time Machine”?

It appears that XLH will be a thing of the past in a few short years. It seems quixotic, or even perverse, to mourn it, but how will we address genetic differences in the future? I can’t predict where Crispr and the like will lead, but I do know that ethics and lived experience must be important guides, and that the very knowledge contained in the disability community is perhaps the best place to start, for who better to consider such questions than those of us who have lived with being different?