Interval training, as we've mentioned before, is one of the most efficient ways to exercise. Yesterday we shared a routine that gives you a full-body workout with 12 exercises in 7 minutes. By request, here are videos that show how to do each of those exercises properly.

We've shared several of these videos previously, in our guide to getting a full workout with just your body and our Lifehacker Workout program. These 12 videos cover all the movements for the program we shared yesterday, designed by performance coaches at the Human Performance Institute.

Advertisement

Do each exercise as many times as you can for 30 seconds (or in the plank poses, hold for 30 seconds), and pause for 10 seconds between each exercise.

Keep in mind that for many people this isn't meant to be just a 7-minute workout, but rather a 7-minute cycle that you do a few (e.g., 2 or 3) times.

By the way, Lifehacker reader Will Wilson wrote up this handy webapp for the 7 minute routine, telling you when to start and stop each movement.

1. Jumping Jacks

There are two variations: one with your arms going all the way up and one with your bent arm raised to shoulder height. This video shows the bent arm variation, which is helpful if you have shoulder issues. It's a good warm-up movement.

2. Wall Sit

In this exercise, you lean back onto a wall and slide down into a squat position so you have a 90-degree bend in your legs. Hold that position for up to 30 seconds, but make sure you don't slide down if you get fatigued.

3. Push Ups

To do a push up correctly, make sure your body is completely flat as you move up and down.

4. Abdominal Crunches

To do a crunch, keep your feet flat on the floor, hold your hands at the side of your head, and lift your chest. Avoid rounding your back or pulling your elbows inward. If you have back issues or want to try an easier variation, consider the reverse crunch or bicycle crunch.

5. Step-up Onto Chair

Start at about two feet away from the chair, and step up onto it powerfully. Repeat with the alternate leg leading.

6. Squat

To do a proper squat, put your feet shoulder-width apart, hold your arms forward, and go down until your thighs are about parallel with the floor. Don't let your knees go past your toes. For an easier modification, do this against a wall or pole.

7. Triceps Dip on Chair

This video shows an "easy" variation with your hands facing towards the back of your chair, as well as a way to make this more advanced with a second chair. Keep your torso straight as you lower yourself down until your arms are bent about 90 degrees.

8. Plank

For the plank pose, hold yourself in a push-up position, without lowering down.

9. High Knees Running in Place

To do a high knee run, you simply run in place. Move your arms in sync and hold your hands in a soft grip and relax your face.

10. Lunge

This video shows how to do the front-stepping lunge, but you can modify with a back or rear lunge (which might be easier on your knees) or alternate in side lunges.

11. Push Up and Rotation

In this exercise, you lower down in a push up, but as you come up, extend your arm and turn your body to face one side. Lower down again, then extend to the other side.

12. Side Plank

Finally, in the side plank, you're holding your body turned to one side. This video shows the beginner version, with the bottom leg bent for support, and more advanced versions with the bottom leg straightened out and your arm extended. Repeat on the other side.

Whew!