“I don’t believe that all species are created equally,” said Dr. Sax.

Until recently, ecologists trying to solve the mystery of invasive species paid relatively little attention to their origins, focusing instead on factors that might be helping them in their new homes. The invaders, for example, may benefit from leaving behind their enemies: Without the parasites and predators adapted to killing them, they’re free to multiply with abandon.

Or a newly arrived species may thrive because humans have made the new ecosystems vulnerable to invasion. Cutting a forest into fragments or loading a lake with fertilizer tears apart the ecological web, making it easier for new species to slip into the gaps.

But as far back as the 19th century, some scientists saw a role for evolution. In “The Origin of Species,” Charles Darwin wrote that we shouldn’t be surprised by native species “being beaten and supplanted by the naturalised productions from another land.”

Darwin reasoned that these victories were inevitable. Different species might adapt to a particular ecological niche in different parts of the world. Put them in the same place, in the same niche, and one might well outcompete the other because it has evolved superior attributes.

Before Dr. Fridley and Dr. Sax met in 2007, each had become convinced that Darwin might be right. When they discovered they shared the same belief, they joined forces to test Darwin’s idea. Their approach was two-pronged.

First, they looked at the places where invasive plant species tend to originate, examining the number of plant families in various regions. Invasive plants, they found, were more likely to have evolved in habitats with a great diversity of competing species. Darwin was right: Some plants have evolved to be fighters.

“We were both kind of gobsmacked,” said Dr. Fridley.

In the second test, Dr. Fridley and Dr. Sax looked at the role that canals have played in helping some species become invasive. Sometimes, humans have dug canals that linked ecosystems with an equal diversity of species. But in other instances, canals have connected regions with low diversity to those with great variety of species.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The scientists predicted that invasive fish and mollusks would tend to come from places with high diversity and would have used canals to establish themselves in habitats with low diversity.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s not a perfect experiment,” said Dr. Sax. “But it’s still a pretty good unplanned experiment.”

In 1825, the Erie Canal joined the Great Lakes to the Hudson River. The two ecosystems orginally had about the same diversity of fish and mollusk species, the ecologists found, and species from each side became invasive on the opposite side in roughly the same proportions.

The story of the Suez Canal was very different. On one side was the Red Sea and the Indian Ocean, a huge, stable ecosystem with a deep diversity of fish and mollusks. On the other side was the Mediterranean, a relatively young habitat without nearly as much species diversity.

Dr. Fridley and Dr. Sax found the Mediterranean was overwhelmed with invasive species from the other side of the canal, while hardly any from the Mediterranean took up residence in the Red Sea.

Dr. Fridley speculated that a similar imbalance could explain why the Northeast gets so many invasive species from East Asia. Today both regions have a similar climate. But the United States was buried by glaciers during the Ice Ages, while East Asia was spared. Its species continued to grow more diverse, to evolve and eventually to become superior competitors — ready to invade, once humans started acting as their chauffeurs.

Jay Stachowicz, an ecologist at the University of California, Davis, who was not involved in the study, praised the researchers for finding a way to investigate Darwin’s idea. “They’re probably the first to test it in a meaningful way,” he said.

David Tilman, an ecologist the University of Minnesota, called the study “a wonderful extension of Darwin’s hypothesis.” But he cautioned that the work raises a paradox. While predators and pathogens can wipe out native species, it’s rare for an invasive competitor to do so.

“The most common outcome is coexistence,” said Dr. Tilman. The new hypothesis doesn’t explain why.

The evolutionary imbalance hypothesis, as Dr. Sax and Dr. Fridley call their hypothesis, could have a grim implication for conservation biologists trying to preserve native species: They may be fighting millions of years of evolution.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“If that’s true, the phrase, ‘Resistance is futile’ comes to mind,” said Dr. Stachowicz.