Your Horoscope by Susan Miller

This is one of those on-off, yes-no, chocolate or vanilla months, where events will move slowly and in high contrast. One minute a project may be going off the rails, and at other times, you will feel that everything, finally, is right with the world. This trend will be felt by every zodiac sign, and it is enough to make us all manic. You will have to be content with making incremental steps, not large strides toward goals, but this is only a temporary situation. In the meantime, going slowly might be a blessing, for you are likely to make more progress that way than by rushing through deals that later you will wish you had done differently. You will be acting in a more deliberate fashion, thinking through each project with care, and in April, that spells success.

There are many forces creating this situation. First, as you begin the month, Venus will still be retrograde, a holdover from March 5 when Venus first started to go in reverse. Venus will stay retrograde until April 15, but will take some time to reach former strength – gradually getting stronger by May 18. In the meantime, at least prior to April 15, don’t schedule any massive changes to your appearance – no rhinoplasty (nose) or facial plastic surgery, no experimental dermatological treatments, no dramatic shifts in hairstyle or color, and it probably would be best not to change the frames on your eyeglasses now unless you need a new prescription. (In that case, get the glasses, of course.) You CAN get normal grooming done – have trims, color touch ups, and by all means, use your normal moisturizers and serums, and tried-and-true gadgets that you like to use on your face at home. Women, put off buying new makeup for the new season until May. Men, get those cool designer sunglasses you want to buy in May.

Venus rules love, beauty, and all the fun, luxurious things of life – precious jewels, perfume, flowers, wine and champagne, imported chocolates, lavish parties – you get the idea. When Venus gets her beauty sleep, she withholds her greatest powers, so these areas are ones to avoid for now. It certainly is not the time to give an expensive party or charity benefit (donations are likely to be low) or to launch a product or service of interest to women. Venus holds sway over profits, especially in regard to endeavors that are aimed toward the female market. Venus also rules love, so it’s not considered a good time to meet someone new if you are single, for in the unfolding of the relationship, you are likely to later feel that the relationship lacks emotional support and affection. Venus is now moving through your home sector, so if you are focused on a design project, it might be best to hold off buying new furniture or a mattress until May. The more expensive your purchase in any of these areas, the more I would urge you to wait to act on or any time after May 18.

The planets that spin close to earth are the ones that fall more directly when retrograde. Astrologers call these close-by planets “personal planets” and they include Mercury, Venus, and Mars. Mars is fine and won’t retrograde until next year. Venus goes retrograde every two years, and you know she is in one of her backslides now.

Here is where I need to drop the other shoe: Mercury is about to retrograde too, from April 9 to May 3. It’s as if the universe is saying, stop, slow down, listen, and think. This month, there is no need to move fast, but a great need to think deeply about relationships and endeavors, and to review assumptions, which might be off.

Mercury is the natural ruler of your career sector, your tenth house of honors, awards, and achievement. With Mercury moving backward in your workaday sector during half of the retrograde, you need to be sure there are no errors in your work. Be prepared for changes in direction from the client too.

You may be calling executives you know and worked with in the past but have not seen in months or years. This is a good idea for it is the perfect way to use Mercury retrograde. If you work in sales, see long-term clients who always believed in you, supported you, and who you have not seen lately to thank them for their business. If you are trying to forge a new deal, details will come up that temporarily stall you, and you will need to work through those details.

When Mercury retrogrades, we tend to forget things, whether that be certain deal points or actual physical items that you love, like your iPhone, Dr. Dre headphones, your sunglasses, or your iPad. You might want to tape your business card to the back of your electronics and place your card inside your eyeglass case. You can’t be too careful. If a kind soul finds your missing item, make it easy for that person to be in touch with you without having to guess your password.

Daily Astrology Zone With our new subscription service you get forecasts for your sign each day of the year from the top astrologer in the world. Subscribe Now »