Before white supremacists marched in Charlottesville, Va., in defense of a statue of Robert E. Lee, before this nation’s president tweeted, “You can’t change history, but you can learn from it. Robert E. Lee, Stonewall Jackson — who’s next, Washington, Jefferson? So foolish!” a huge majority of my family organized to defend history as it had regarded our ancestor Thomas Jefferson. It was 1998, and a DNA study of descendants of Jefferson had produced evidence that he had fathered Sally Hemings’ children. Until that evidence was published, every prominent historian save two had taken the position essentially that despite the unarguable fact that Jefferson had owned more than 600 slaves during his lifetime, he was “not the kind of man” who would have had children with a slave. Jefferson’s reputation was at stake. So was history as we had known it.

I was invited on “The Oprah Winfrey Show” that winter with my sister Mary where we met about 25 of our Hemings cousins. There was little doubt in that television studio — and no doubt whatsoever among the descendants of Sally Hemings and Thomas Jefferson — what the truth was. Oral history within their family had held for almost 200 years that Jefferson and Hemings had had a 36-year relationship that had produced six children. About three-quarters of the way through her show, right after we came out of a commercial, Oprah put me on the spot. She turned to me and said something like, since you’ve met your cousins, Lucian, what are you going to do now?

For an instant, I sat there speechless. Even though I had accepted for years the fact that my fifth great-grandfather had fathered Sally’s children, Oprah was right. I hadn’t done anything. I was one of Jefferson’s great-grandchildren whose descendance was never questioned. In fact, when I wrote a New York Times Op-Ed piece in 1998 about the Jefferson-Hemings controversy, it was the first time I had announced publicly that I was a descendant. Do you think the editors of the august New York Times, for whom I had written for 25 years without telling them about this part of my past, asked me a single question about how I was descended from the nation’s third president? Do you think they asked me for a single piece of evidence that this was true? The answers are no, and no. I was accepted as a great grandson of Jefferson and permitted to tell the world about it in the pages of the most important newspaper in the world for one reason: I was white. It had been easy my entire life to sit there and be who I am and do nothing, but suddenly, it wasn’t. Oprah and her live audience sat there waiting for my answer: What, in fact, was I going to do?

Then it came to me. I said, I’d like to invite everyone from the Hemings side of the family to accompany me to the annual Jefferson family reunion at Monticello the following May. Innocently, I thought it would be a wonderful occasion for the two sides of the family to meet, and now that DNA had established that we shared Jefferson as our great grandfather, our Hemings cousins would be welcomed into the family and could join the Monticello Association, the family group that owns the graveyard at Monticello. After all, Oprah herself had told the audience that day that she didn’t need anyone to tell her who she was, and who her ancestors were. “I know every day when I wake up and look at myself in the mirror.” It was time for the descendants of Thomas Jefferson and Sally Hemings to tell their white cousins that they were Jefferson’s great-grandchildren too.

So the following May, we went to the reunion, my brother and sisters and I and about 50 or our Hemings cousins. I’ll tell you without further ado that it didn’t go as I had expected. Even though, quite literally, hundreds of representatives of the press from all over the world were there to record the event, things got ugly. Racist comments were made to some of our Hemings cousins by some of the white descendants. The day following the reunion on the mountaintop, at a family meeting in Charlottesville, the battle lines were drawn. There was no way the white descendants of Jefferson were going to accept the Hemings descendants into the family. In coming years, as my Hemings cousins and I went to the family reunion again and again, speeches would be made; treatises by various historians would be commissioned and published attacking the Hemings’ claim; attacks in the media were launched against me, questioning my motives and alleging arrests for crimes I didn’t commit and convictions in trials that never happened. During the first two years, I received more than 100 anonymous death threats by telephone, email and U.S. mail. My personal favorite was an envelope that arrived in the mail containing two photos. The first was of a .45 caliber pistol showing a Jefferson nickel embedded in its wooden grip. The second was the same pistol pointed straight at me with the words “race traitor” hand-written underneath.