The Benefits Of Consistency In Working Out

This Guy Is Living Proof That You Can Achieve Anything If You Put Your Mind To It

Redditor FarFetchedSketch decided to take the opportunity to turn his life around for the better at the end of 2015 — he hit the gym and decided to get fit. "I was just another forgettable face in any crowded room and I just kind of got sick of this so i decided to hit the gym in the hopes it would make me stand out a little more" he writes in his post.

He started his journey in early January. He set himself up with a modified "Push, Pull, Legs" routine that kept him busy six days a week. Here's what that looks like:

Day 1: Triceps and Chest

Day 2: Biceps and Back

Day 3: Legs and Shoulders

Day 4: Triceps and Chest

Day 5: Biceps and Back

Day 6: Legs

Splitting the week into focusing on different parts of the body is a very popular method of getting the most out of your gym time. Alternating between complementary muscle groups maximizes recovery times and allows you to get in a hard workout whenever you manage to get yourself to the gym.

The one big downside to FarFetchedSketch's weekly schedule: not enough focus on the legs. Legs often get abandoned by gym rats and that's what ended up coining the phrase "skipping leg day." Developed leg muscles are key to a strong overall physique. They stabilize your spine, keep your posture, and let's not forget, they take you wherever you want to go — don't ignore them!

But FarFetchedSketch has some words to say about this: "By just being in the gym you're doing infinitely more for yourself than if you were at home, so have some fun with it. Do the exercises you enjoy. There's no such thing as an 'essential exercise'." Doing them is better than not doing them.

As for eating healthy, he found that even a "little bit of research" can help immensely. "Just remember that 20 minutes of self control at the grocery store is much easier than a week of self control in your kitchen and you'll be astonished at how much your body composition changes with simple eating habits."

FarFetchedSketch has even gone so far as to ditch his Web Design program in college, and turned his focus on getting his Personal Training Diploma. "I can now confidentially say that deciding to get into shape was the single best decision of my life. I fell in love with it and it has become my passion."