IKEA is always introducing exciting new products. The downside of this is that they're always retiring old products. Some of them you may never miss, or never even notice that they're gone, but the loss of others feels like the loss of an old friend. (Sure, I never did buy a canopy bed from IKEA, but it was nice to know that I could. You know?) A moment of silence, please, for these eight beloved IKEA products, taken from us too soon.

Stockholm sofa in emerald green velvet

When I spotted this dreamy emerald-green velvet sofa at ICFF 2013, it was love at first sight. At $1,000, the Stockholm sofa hit a higher price point than most IKEA products — but it also had a much more luxurious look. The older version of this sofa is still available, but, sadly, only in leather. There's also a newer version of the Stockholm sofa, called the Stockholm 2017, but to me, it's just not the same.

The Benjamin stool, at work as a nightstand in a room from Mille M2 (Image credit: Mille M2)

Benjamin stool

IKEA's Benjamin stool had a lovely bentwood design, and could be stacked, cut down to make a laptop desk, or even used as a nightstand. Sadly, it has now disappeared from IKEA's lineup, and your best bet for finding one is Craigslist or eBay.

A beautifully draped Edland in a space spotted on Emmas Designblogg (Image credit: Apartment Therapy )

Edland four poster bed

I once wrote a post about how the Edland is the world's most popular bed. (To clarify, I am not actually certain that the Edland was at any point the world's bestselling bed, just that it seemed to pop up on design blogs a whole, whole lot.) I still see it in photos quite a bit, but sadly IKEA no longer offers it — or any other canopy bed, for that matter.

Jonathan Lo of Happy Mundane covered his Enteri in walnut contact paper for a sophisticated look. (Image credit: Happy Mundane)

Enetri shelf

The Enetri, beloved for its low price and modern style, has disappeared from IKEA's shelves. Interestingly enough, it is remarkably similar to this colorful vintage IKEA shelf, designed by Niels Gammelgaard in 1985.

Norrebo shelf

Another late, great IKEA shelf is the Norrebo, whose warm, minimal style made it an ideal room divider. It came in several different sizes, which could be stacked or just placed side by side.

Asker pot

These little wall-hanging pots, which were great for greenery as well as organizing smaller items like craft supplies, have disappeared from IKEA's lineup. If you like the look, MyGift has a very similar style for $11.50.

Lack console shelf

IKEA's Lack line once included this deceptively simple piece of furniture, which can serve as both a bookcase (placed on end) or a console (as pictured). I think the console is a highly underrated piece of furniture, and this particular one, because of its slim dimensions, was particularly versatile, even able to fit under most windows, as in the picture above. Its construction gives it a certain solidity, while its simplicity makes it light and modern.

IKEA PS 2012 side table

This was another particularly simple design, a big favorite of DIYers because it was so easy to dress up. It could be spray-painted (or even copper leafed) to look like a much higher-end piece (sans the wire shelf), and I am sad that it is no longer part of IKEA's lineup, if only because I'll no longer see any brilliant DIYs with this as the starting point.

Got any favorite pieces that have been lost to time? Things you wish you could buy but can't? Share in the comments! And to see even more late, great IKEA pieces, check out this roundup of 11 amazing vintage IKEA pieces we wish they would bring back.