Wingstop Garlic Parmesan wings have to be one of my favorite types of chicken wings when you go out. I know, not everyone loves the hot and spicy buffalo wing, some folks love wings, but not the heat. I can show you a new favorite to fall in love with.



I live in Houston, Texas. Here we have a place that is called Wingstop, they make excellent wings, while it may be said that I haven't found many chicken wings that I dislike, these are a favorite of mine. The wings are cooked to perfection then drizzled with garlic butter sauce that has Parmesan cheese. It's enough to tear me away from the classic buffalo wing to go for something different.

Buffalo wings have been around thankfully since the Anchor bar created the wings sometime in the 1960s. I think that is hard to beat a buffalo wing, they have the right amount of heat and just the right amount of tang. I know that not everyone likes the heat, and they want to enjoy wings. This flavor is perfect. The Wingstop garlic Parmesan wings combine beautifully to make a delightful combination. It's not too wimpy in terms of flavor; it just lacks the spice.

How to Cut the Wings

I always suggest that you buy wings from the grocery store and cut them yourself. I promise you can cut a couple of pounds of wings in no time. Typically we eat wings that are cut into three different parts. Those three different parts are the wingtip, the wing, and the “drummette.” The wingtip requires no real explanation; it is the end most outer piece. Normally when this is cut this is not typically eaten, but you can save these pieces to make stock out of.

Once the wingtip is removed you are left with the wing and the “drummette.” You will want to cut those two pieces where the joint is. After you cut off the wingtip, move the knife down towards the next joint, and you will cut the wing into the piece that has the wing, and the “drummette.” You might wonder why part of it is called the “drummette,” it is called that because it looks like a mini drumstick.

It is often quite a bit cheaper to cut them instead of buying them precut, and I am all about saving some money.

The Cooking Method

For this garlic Parmesan chicken wing recipe, we are going to use a two phase cooking method. We are going to begin the cooking process by deep frying these for about 5 minutes; then we will move the wings to a wire rack on a baking sheet and then finishing them in the oven. I think this helps to give the crispy texture we all love wings for, but we will also make sure the wings have cooked all the way through. No one likes raw or undercooked chicken. Chicken can be difficult to fry just right because the pieces are different sizes, and no one should take a chance on potentially undercooked chicken.

The Sauce

Our sauce is a simple sauce; it is butter heated with garlic powder, and Parmesan cheese. I want to make an unorthodox suggestion here. I know, when I recreate a recipe, I want to be faithful as possible as I can be. I want you to have a similar experience as you would in the restaurant. On this recipe, I am going to suggest a different step. When you are making your sauce, I want you to consider using chopped garlic instead of garlic powder. Unethical, yes. Tasty? Oh. Yes.

Must try Variation

For the alternative butter sauce, I want you to chop your garlic fairly fine, and simmer it butter for about 5 to 7 minutes. I want you to simmer the garlic until it becomes tender and begins to make your kitchen smell wonderfully fragrant. Then add in your Parmesan cheese. The fresh garlic adds a dimension to the sauce that everyone will love.

One other cooking tip here, this is about the only time I will tell you it is ok, in fact, preferred that you use the Parmesan cheese that comes in a can. I know, I feel a lot of shame saying that right now. I like that in this form it won't melt rapidly and that it represents more of what the restaurant does. It just works better in this case. It retains its shape and makes more of a flaky coating than it does when it is all melted.

I promise when you finish making these wings, you will be proud that you can make the best garlic Parmesan wings. I have to add one more thing; they don't reheat well. Reheating wings means you get a soft almost soggy outside. While they don't taste bad, they just aren't quite as exciting as they are when you first serve them, but who is going to have leftovers anyway?

Love wings? You may want to try my Wings and Things Garlic Buffalo Wings



Wingstop Garlic Parmesan Wings Looking for an alternative way to make wings? Check out this savory garlic parmesan wing. Ingredients 2 pounds chicken wings

2 cups flour

2 teaspoons seasoned salt

1/2 teaspoon cayenne pepper

1/2 teaspoon ground black pepper

1/4 cup butter

2 teaspoons garlic powder

2 tablespoons Parmesan cheese

Parsley for garnish - if desired Directions Preheat oven to 350 degrees. Blend together flour, seasoned salt, cayenne pepper and ground black pepper. Cut wings and dredge them in the flour. Heat oil to 350 degrees. Fry wings for about 5 to 7 minutes, and then drain on a wire rack. Depending upon the side of your pot fry 5 or 6 wings at a time. Be sure to stir the wings once during cooking to make sure that the wings cook evening. Cook the wings until they just begin to brown. Bake wings for about 15 minutes or until the chicken is cooked through. Prepare the sauce by melting the butter and the garlic powder in a small pan. When the wings have finished cooking in the oven place the wings into a large bowl. Stir in half of the Parmesan cheese into the melted butter. Pour the melted garlic butter over the wings and toss until the wings are well coated. Serve the wings by sprinkling the remaining Parmesan cheese top of the wings. Print Recipe