If you spilled a whiskey all over your computer or signed a lease for a bedbug-filled apartment, relax! It’s probably not your fault; it’s probably Mercury retrograde.

The astrological phenomenon, which started Thursday and goes until Oct. 9, is the hottest scapegoat in town, the juice cleanse of the cosmos, if you will.

According to astrological hucksters (and the flocks who follow them), the three periods each year when Mercury appears to be moving backward are total pandemonium, a time when the stars are liable to wreak havoc on technical devices, morning commutes and official documents.

Too bad it’s total nonsense. Mercury retrograde isn’t responsible for the G train being late or your iPhone freezing up, any more than that black cat that crossed your path gave you bad luck.

And yet, belief in “Mercury retrograde” is getting stronger and stronger. My social media feeds are filled with comments from otherwise logical, educated people who take the phenomenon seriously.

“Is Mercury still in retrograde?” one friend, a female writer in Brooklyn, posted on Facebook recently. “Emails have been getting misplaced like a mofo over on my end.” A business consultant friend in South Carolina says she won’t “sign official documents or finalize during a retrograde.”

Searches for the phrase “Mercury retrograde” more than doubled between 2004 and 2015, according to Google Trends, and retrograde survival guides have seeped from hokey astrology sites to mainstream websites like Elle, Refinery29 and the Cut.

Believe what you want. Believe that Mercury has Harry Potter hexing powers, believe in psychics, believe in an invisible teapot circling the Earth. But don’t cancel plans with me because of some cosmic quackery or fill my Facebook feed with lame, annoying, pseudoscientific laments.

Columbia University astronomy professor David Helfand points to more pernicious problems. The growing popularity of astrology, he says, shares DNA with anti-science movements like anti-vaccination efforts and climate-change denial (though horoscopes are certainly less worrisome than a rubella outbreak).

“Magical thinking isn’t going to solve [our problems],” he says.

The origin of observing cosmic phenomena goes back thousands of years, when people thought the cosmos revolved around the Earth, long before Google and Neil deGrasse Tyson. But Mercury never actually “retrogrades.”

It’s just an illusion caused by the rotation of the Earth, like passing a local train that appears to be going backwards because you’re on an express train, moving so quickly past it.

The last time a planet had any effect on us, Helfand says, is when a chunk of rock that would eventually become Mars crashed into Earth and created the moon 4.5 billion years ago.

He checked: If it’s a bad time to sign important documents, no one told the signers of the Declaration of Independence, the Japanese who surrendered during World War II or Lyndon B. Johnson when he signed the Voting Rights Act — all major events that happened during retrograde.

“That’s the whole point, right?” says Helfand. “Astrology has no physical mechanism to explain any physical effect. It doesn’t need to explain anything.”

So sure, it’s easy to blame being late to work on a mysterious space wind stalling your train. But when retrograde ends on Oct. 9, you’ve got no one to blame but yourself.

But I’m a believer!



The Post’s Robert Rorke says astrology isn’t silly

When astrologers say Mercury is going retrograde, people react as if the Ebola virus has been let into the solar system, and with good reason.

In astrological lore, Mercury is the planet that rules communications of all sorts. When the planet goes “backward,” problems in that area usually arise.

Some may brush it off as pseudoscience, but I’ve found it to be true in my own life. I first took an interest in astrology 10 years ago when I noticed things going amiss when Mercury was in retrograde.

Phone calls went unreturned, appointments were missed and schedules seemed to always be changing at the last minute.

Mercury goes retrograde three times a year, and the current period is in Libra, the sign that rules relationships, partnerships and diplomacy. During this time, it’s common to hear from old friends and contacts you haven’t spoken to in ages.

As someone who doesn’t love surprises of this nature — diplomacy is not my strong suit — I always brace myself for awkward reunions while remaining open-minded: Maybe they won’t be so bad. But, maybe they will.