For decades, basketball sneakers weren't like other sneakers. Take Reebok's "The Question," Allen Iverson's signature shoe: truly ridiculous, enormous moon-boot type high-tops with a whopping four visible bubbles of Reebok's "Hexalite" shock absorption technology in each shoe. That look—elaborate, bulky high-tops—has quietly begun its exit from the upper echelons of the basketball world, and the reason why reveals a lot not just about sneaker culture but about the changing way professional basketball is played, and how the dramatic move away from the late '90s, early '00s culture of maximalism affects even the bombastic world of professional sports.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Getty Jeff Fusco

For the first time, a generation of players is playing in low-tops. The signature shoes of many of the NBA's superstars—James Harden, Damian Lillard, Kevin Durant—are minimalist low-tops. Today's highest-tech, most forward-thinking basketball sneakers don't look like basketball sneakers. And the sneakerheads who love the rich history of the high-top basketball silhouette have had to look beyond the basketball court for inspiration.

Professional basketball players haven't always played in high-tops—as a matter of fact, they haven't always even had sneakers specifically designed for basketball—but since the 1960s, high-tops have been the norm. Starting with high-top Keds and moving to Chuck Taylors, leather Nikes, Air Jordans, and those Reeboks, the height of a shoe's upper has long been what makes it a basketball sneaker.

SHOP NOW: Top Ten Hi ($80) by Adidas, footlocker.com

There are exceptions. "People have been playing in low tops as long as there has been basketball, to a degree," says Russ Bengston, a senior editor at Complex who has spent two decades writing about basketball sneakers and sneaker culture. But starting in the late 1970s with the Adidas Top Ten, players, trainers, and sneaker makers all began to assume that a high-top was an essential tool of high-level basketball, primarily for reasons of ankle support. Basketball requires a great deal of lateral and up-and-down movement, which can strain the tendons and bones of the foot and ankle. Basketball players aren't just at risk of turning, spraining, or breaking their ankles—it's practically guaranteed. And there are only so many times you can avoid landing on another player's foot. "Ankle injuries are probably the most common bone and joint injuries that basketball players suffer," says Dr. David Geier, an orthopedic surgeon and sports medicine expert who works extensively with basketball players.

The Adidas Top Ten Courtesy Adidas

The theory is pretty simple: A high upper, pulled nice and tight, straps the ankle into place, giving that joint more support and preventing it from twisting dangerously. Makes sense! Except. There has never been a single study that proves or even solidly indicates that a high-top sneaker prevents ankle injuries compared with a low-top. "There's no science out there, that we have at least, that proves that a high-top shoe is more effective at reducing ankle injuries than anything else," says Kevin Dodson, Nike's senior design director for basketball footwear. The past six years—we can date it pretty precisely—have stripped the classic basketball shoe of all the extras it doesn't need. A truly great basketball sneaker doesn't really need visible air bubbles or diamond-shaped Hexalite or reinforced Velcro straps or, especially, a high upper that hugs the ankle.