The daughter of New York's 'King of Retail' married in a sunset ceremony overlooking the Adriatic Sea today watched by of over 400 friends and family.

Renee Sutton and her fiancée Eliot Cohen wed in a traditional Jewish ceremony following a four-day build up to the big event.

Her billionaire father Jeff – the 522nd richest man in the world – is said to have spent $25 million on the wedding extravaganza making it one of the most expensive ever staged.

The property mogul had arrived for the ceremony with his daughter in a horse drawn carriage.

As the couple waited for the ceremony to begin, a choir sang modern love songs. They married standing beneath a chuppah – a wedding canopy that symbolizes a new home being created by the couple

Renee wore a veil and a necklace paired with her long sleeved lace gown with a back cutout. Her father was seen wearing a kippah at the ceremony

Some of the guests rode up to the wedding ceremony on horse drawn carriages while violin players played along the driveway

Renee Sutton, daughter of real estate mogul Jeff Sutton (right), and Eliot Cohen married Thursday afternoon at St Stephen Castle near Monopoli in southern Italy. The wedding is estimated to have cost $25 million

The pair married under a huppah after Jeff and Renee Sutton arrived on a horse-drawn carriage to the ceremony

In addition to the 400 guests invited, more than 100 locals gathered outside to watch the nuptials

The locals who were not invited to the wedding were still able to see the nuptials from the beach

The couple married in a traditional Jewish ceremony following a multi-day build up to the big event

The newlyweds, who are both in their twenties, were engaged earlier this year according to social media posts

There was no shortage of live music at the Sutton and Eliot wedding. A crew was spotted setting up a stage while several musicians with violins were playing

Security guards patrolled the area to make sure people who were not invited did not get too close to the ceremony

A line of vehicles ushered in wedding guests. A limo driver told DailyMail.com over 50 vehicles have been hired for the week to transport guests around the city

Friends and family – who had been flown to the Italian resort of Monopoli on the Puglia coast by chartered plane from New York – took their seats on a wooden platform built on a rocky outcrop.

A choir sang modern love songs as they waited for the service to begin.

The couple were wed in a traditional Jewish ceremony standing beneath a chuppah – a wedding canopy that symbolizes a new home being created by the union.

The newly weds were cheered as they walked between rows of guests past Saint Stefano Abbey and made their way to the reception being held on a nearby beach

Workmen had spent the last week transforming the small curved sandy beach into a party area complete with a dance floor.

More than 100 locals gathered to watch the ceremony, which began after 6pm local time (noon in New York) .

Many had been drawn by rumors in the Italian press that Madonna or Lady Gaga were to perform for the couple at their wedding party.

The rumors turned out to be false as did speculation that Ivanka Trump and Chelsea Clinton would be attending the nuptials.

Renee Sutton and fiancé Eliot Cohen's wedding had roughly eight tons flowers from Holland on display. Her father, 57-year-old Jeff Sutton, is worth approximately $3.6 billion

Renee Sutton's wedding began at 6pm in Italy, noon in New York. Her father became famous from his luxury real estate purchases in Manhattan

Guests at the wedding were seen posing for photos together with the Adriatic Sea as the backdrop

Men in white shirts and back trousers, presumably headed to the wedding, walked towards the wedding venue

Guests dined on purple tables with lavender accents. Photos on inset reveal the venue is at the magnificent Borgano resort inside what appears to be a natural rock formation

The stunning display featured starfish details for the place settings of one of the dinners. There was also a starfish light fixture in the middle of each table

Lavish gold and red decorations were the accents of one of the dining halls at the Sutton wedding

Locals were given an early glimpse of the bride and her backless dress when she appeared with her fiancée to pose for photos before the actual ceremony began.

The groom and her father wore evening suits with bow ties and looked relaxed and happy as they chatted.

Up until 30 minutes before guests arrived for the marriage ceremony teams of workmen toiled to complete the beach reception area.

While chairs and tables were hastily put in place others stapled while cloth backdrops to screens surrounding the beach.

The evening was to end with a spectacular fireworks display before a fleet of mini took the guests to Bari airport for overnight flight back to New York.

Sutton has spent close to $5 million on flying the guests to Italy on three charter flights.

There was a second stage set up for live entertainment during the four-day wedding extravaganza

Servers were on standby waiting at intricately tiled bars for Renee Sutton and Eliot Cohen's wedding

Guests were surrounded by flowers and candles as they dined at the resort. There were reportedly eight tons flowers from Holland shipped in for the wedding

Jeff Sutton, who is worth $3.6 billion, spared no expense for his youngest daughter's lavish wedding

A Boeing 757 made two trips and a Boeing 747 chartered from United Airlines brought the bride and groom along with close family members.

Each of the 13,000 round trips from New York to Bari cost $700,000.

As the 522nd richest man in the world with a fortune of $3.6 billion no expense was spared for the lavish wedding.

More than eight tons of flowers had been flown in from Holland and the 400 guests stayed at a luxury five star resort where rooms start at over $500 a night.

Sutton had also hired beach clubs to keep guests entertained with unlimited food and drink.

More than 50 mini buses were hired for the entire week to ferry guests around.

Teams of security men were also flown over from New York as were the musicians providing the evening's entertainment.

Guests stayed at the exclusive Borgano Egnazia resort in the town of Fasano.

The tables guests ate at tables decorated with hanging flowers. The celebration continued on Wednesday and Thursday

Security guards made sure wedding crashers could not infiltrate the Sutton wedding which was attended by 400 guests

Since arriving in Italy, guests have been treated to a series of private parties and spent a full day on the beach Wednesday

All 63 rooms and villas on the 600-acre resort were block booked for the Sutton wedding.

The couple have four other children and have a $22 million home set on the Jersey shore but call Gravesend in Brooklyn where Sutton's grandparents first settled their main home.

Sutton has made his fortune from property in Manhattan where he got the nickname 'The King of Retail' from his ability to attract high-end stores to his properties.

His company Wharton Properties owns some of the most expensive real estate on 5th Avenue with a host of designer names leasing his stores.

The 400 guests will dine in style and have the selection of meals from a 20-page menu prepared by a team of international chefs

Private concert: Workers were seen setting up a stage where a VIP guest, rumored to be Madonna, will perform. Bride Renee Sutton is the daughter of the world's 522nd richest man

VIPs and New York royalty were expected to attend the lavish wedding. Jeff Sutton made his fortune by renting out Manhattan real estate

He is landlord to Armani, Escada, Dolce and Gabbana and Abercrombie and Fitch while last year in partnership with developers SL Green he signed sports giant Nike to a new $700 million lease 15 year for their 5th Avenue store.

His company owns 125 properties in Manhattan and last year paid $1.78 billion for the Crown Building on 5th Avenue – often referred to as the gold coast of retail.

Sutton, who began his property career as a retail broker, is not known for flashy shows of extravagance preferring to keep a low profile.

He and his wife are active within Jewish charity organizations but he is rarely seen at red carpet events.

A chartered jumbo jet was hired to whisk the first 150 wedding guests from Newark to Italy. With return trips at the end of the week the final bill for the flights is estimated to be $5 million

Renee Sutton and fiancé Eliot Cohen are both in their early twenties were married in a Jewish ceremony on Thursday. Her father Jeff Sutton is known to keep a low profile, but he is sparing no expense for his youngest daughter's wedding

The newlyweds are expected to descend down this newly built staircase to join guests after the ceremony for their first dance. Construction crews were on site building the stage and dance floor on Tuesday

The beach nearby where the ceremony was be held has been transformed into the party zone with dance floors and a stage