A biologist might study, let’s say, a particular species of rabbit, spending years in the field observing a population of them. A botanist might do the same with a specific grass or tree. But ecologists? They study life, too, but in whole systems at once. An ecologist might study the rabbit, the grass, and add in the local wolf population too. That’s because she’s less interested in the behaviors and traits of one species and more interested in how they interact.

Then the ecologist might build a food web model that reflects things like how a drop in the rabbit population affects wolves, and vice versa. The ecologist could also layer in a drought, a fire, the introduction of a new species of plant, or the long-term impact of climate change. All of those forces will interact with each other to form a dynamic ecosystem. Everything depends on everything else.

Cities may not look like natural ecosystems, but they are prime examples of networks where everything is interdependent. That makes ecology a great method for studying those interactions and their consequences. It’s just that in addition to examining forces like predation or changing rainfall, you have to add in things like politics and and socioeconomic status. According to the speakers on an urban ecology panel on Monday at the American Association for the Advancement of Science meeting in Washington, DC, this idea isn’t about studying the interaction of cities and nature, counting the dispirited frogs trying to eke out a life next to a creek running through a suburb. It’s about using ecological tools to reframe cities as urban biomes, where factors as disparate as climate, green space policy, and economic inequality all interact to create unique ecosystems for the people (and plants and animals) that live in them.

Take Austin, Texas. In the early 20th century, the city forcibly relocated African American residents to Austin’s east side, where environmental factors had created a place with poor drainage and fewer trees. As the city developed, politicians invested in ecological infrastructure—like parks, trees, and bike lanes—on the white side of town. “Valued” species like native pecan trees ended up in rich, white neighborhoods; the plants in African American neighborhoods were more likely to be whatever the cheapest species was at Walmart, regardless of origin and ecosystem function. “Urban nature reflects wealth,” said panelist Stephanie Pincetl , an urban planner at UCLA. To understand Austin’s tree distribution, then, it’s more helpful to look at socioeconomic patterns and the city’s history of racism rather than environmental factors like climate or soil type.

The fact that environmental and social policies are so intertwined in cities has created some unexpected feedback loops, just like ecologists expect to see in a natural environment. “The African American community has been disproportionately burdened by how the city has developed,” said Sarah Dooling , an urban ecologist at the University of Texas and an Austin resident herself. So for example, due to underinvestment in green spaces on the east side of the city, only 30 percent of bus stations are shaded, either by trees or a roof. That's an ecological choice that disproportionately affects people who use public transit.

Just planting more trees on the east side of town won’t fix the problem. When the city comes into those neighborhoods wanting to plant trees, the residents don’t believe the outcome will be shady bus or a new park for the people who already live there. They believe it will be gentrification, as their greened-up neighborhoods suddenly become appealing to people who previously might have only considered living on the tree-lined streets of the west side of Austin. Policy makers who support building bike lanes and planting trees may genuinely want to make life better on Austin’s east side. But for current residents, those intentions are irrelevant when faced with the very real threat of displacement. “These are the tradeoffs that we need to make much more explicit,” Dooling said.

Urban ecology can help bring those feedback loops to light, but the field alone doesn’t offer any fixes. Holistic and effective solutions require tremendous political will and nuanced social policies. But urban ecology does reveal where the cruxes of many of of a city’s problems actually lie. Ecology is great for understanding complex, interdependent networks—both ones found in nature and ones we’ve built ourselves.