␡ Cooking is more fun with friends. Find your friends who are already on Food52, and invite others who aren't to join. Let's Go

Learn more

␡ Join Our Community Follow amazing home cooks. Collect recipes and articles. Get inspired. Sign Up

Lady & Pups' Magic 15-Second Creamy Scrambled Eggs

Author Notes: "A thickening agent is the answer to the previously-thought-impossible scrambled eggs fantasy," Mandy @ Lady and pups writes. "Speed, and creaminess, all together." You'll notice that this calls for a lot of butter, so just to be safe I tried the recipe both with and without the cornstarch, to see how much was really just the goodness of the butter. Without cornstarch, the eggs were good but tougher, the butter more free-floating. And I've found that even if you skimp on the butter, the cornstarch has dramatic effects. Adapted slightly from Lady and Pups. —Genius Recipes

Advertisement

Serves 1

3 large eggs

1 1/2 tablespoons whole milk (1/2 tablespoon for each egg)

1 3/4 teaspoons potato starch or cornstarch (1/2 + 1/8 teaspoon for each egg)

Salt to season

3 tablespoons unsalted butter (1 tablespoon for each egg) First, crack 3 eggs into a medium bowl. Then, in a separate cup or bowl, evenly whisk together the milk and cornstarch until it's lump-free (don’t mix them directly with the eggs or you’ll get lumps). Add the milk and cornstarch mixture to your eggs, and beat until smooth. Season with salt. Heat a non-stick skillet over high heat until hot, then add the butter (should sizzle right away). Wait until the butter’s melted and bubbly, but before it browns… Add the beaten eggs. Wait for 3 seconds without stirring anything, until the edges of the eggs start to bubble up… Then remove the skillet from the heat (yes, remove!), and start stirring the eggs, making 1 full circle per second… 1, 2, 3…. 4, 5, 6, 7…8, 9, 10, 11…(If you use a mini skillet instead of a large one, it may need a few more seconds)... For about 11 to 12 seconds. The eggs will have absorbed all the butter, but remain partially undercooked (add about 5 seconds more to every 3 extra eggs you’re scrambling, but I wouldn’t do more than 6 at once). This is when you transfer them onto a plate. Do not wait until they look fully cooked!

This recipe is a Community Pick!

More Great Recipes:

Eggs|Breakfast & Brunch|Breakfast