BAD history is potent stuff, as Lexington saw when he recently took a teenage son to Gettysburg. When war memories were still fresh, that Pennsylvania town was a shrine to Union suffering. Confederate troops under Robert E. Lee invaded Pennsylvania to bring terror to Union territory. They seized farmers’ property and—in a monstrous touch—kidnapped free blacks and escaped slaves, sending scores southward into captivity. The war was still raging when Abraham Lincoln gave his Gettysburg address to dedicate a Union cemetery there, months after the pivotal battle outside town. So eager were locals for martyrs that Virginia “Jennie” Wade, a young seamstress shot by a stray bullet while baking for Union soldiers and the only civilian casualty of the battle, was pressed into service. The Senate granted her mother a war pension, and in 1900 an elaborate monument to her was erected, largely funded by the Women’s Relief Corps of Iowa, a Union state not represented at the battle.

Yet today, gazing at tourist shops full of Confederate battle flags, replica guns and souvenir T-shirts with slogans like “If At First You Don’t Secede, Try, Try, Again”, visitors to Gettysburg might suppose that the Confederates won. The same shops are piled high with Donald Trump hats and shirts, while Trump-stickered pick-up trucks and Harley-Davidsons rumble along the town’s narrow streets. The Jennie Wade House and gift shop flog Confederate knick-knacks, and—in an attempt at neutrality—tour guides stress the young woman’s friendship with Wesley Culp, a local youth who moved to Virginia and fought for the South. Merchants are following the market: in Trump-voting bits of white America, such as rural Pennsylvania, affection for the Confederacy has floated free of ancestral loyalties. Today the rebel cause stands for a chin-jutting, screw-you sort of conservatism. This extends to modern-day Iowa, home to a Republican congressman and anti-immigrant zealot, Steve King, who for a while kept a Confederate flag on his desk (later removed after a Confederate flag-waver shot two Iowa cops). The rebel flag means different things to different people, says a historian with the National Park Service in Gettysburg, tactfully. For all that, he understands, and quietly worries, if it makes black visitors uncomfortable.

President Donald Trump seems bent on testing whether bad history makes for good politics. Consider his speech in Phoenix, Arizona, on August 22nd, denouncing “weak” political leaders for trying “to take away our culture…our history” when they bow to campaigners calling for Confederate memorials to be removed from display. In fact, the vast majority of Confederate memorials were built between the 1890s and 1950s, long after the civil war. The aim was less to mourn the dead than to intimidate, as states enforced racial segregation with laws and violence.

Trump critics hear more than historical befuddlement. They believe that the president panders to white racial resentment, and think they heard a similar appeal when, shortly after his trip to Arizona, Mr Trump pardoned Joe Arpaio, the 85-year-old former sheriff of the county around Phoenix. Mr Arpaio was convicted for defying court orders to halt police raids and immigration sweeps which, judges found, relied on unconstitutional racial profiling. Mr Trump did not just show clemency to “Sheriff Joe”, an authoritarian showman. He called him a “patriot” who kept Arizona safe, signalling that checks and balances against race-based policing are so much politically correct nonsense.

Those same critics fear that, especially when race is involved, it is bad politics to cleave to more accurate versions of history, or to conventional views of the law. Steve Bannon, the populist nationalist who ran Mr Trump’s campaign and then became his chief strategist in the White House, loves to stoke such fears. Mr Bannon tauntingly urges Trump opponents to keep accusing the president of racism, and to continue toppling statues. “If the left is focused on race and identity, and we go with economic nationalism, we can crush the Democrats,” Mr Bannon told the American Prospect , a leftist journal, shortly before he left the White House. That prediction is echoed by some on the left, including Mark Lilla, a professor at Columbia University and self-styled “blue-collar Democrat” brought up in a gritty corner of Michigan. In a much-discussed new book, “The Once and Future Liberal: After Identity Politics”, Mr Lilla implores Democrats to talk less about racial, gender or sexual differences, and more about class and economics. Rustbelt Democrats with national ambitions, such as Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, say that an excess of identity politics can make their party “toxic” to working-class voters.

The president of Rebel America

Yet the past offers a further lesson, one worrying for those on the left who are sure that the way back to power is to compete with Mr Trump’s fiery economic populism, while shunning his taste for racial controversies. For American history teaches that, once stoked, racial, ethnic and economic grievances are perilously hard to keep apart. In his fine history of the civil war, “Battle Cry of Freedom”, James McPherson records that many whites in Union states like Ohio, Illinois or Indiana were hostile to elites, bankers and blacks in roughly equal measure. Lots of unskilled workers, notably Irish and German Catholics, resented New England grandees for asking them to fight to free the slaves, and suspected that wealthy Yankees saw emancipation as a source of cheap black labour. Populists hated highfalutin newspapers as much as Mr Trump claims to today. In 1863 the New York Times borrowed three Gatling guns from the army to guard its head office as rioters protested against a military draft, yelling “Down with the rich!” and looking to lynch blacks.

Mr Trump, a man with a hazy, self-regarding sense of history, grasps that Them-against-Us rage has deep American roots. Opponents are free to hope that his ploys backfire. But for non-bigots, meeting him in any sort of populist anger contest is a trap.