The Google Analytics Individual Qualification (IQ) is a demonstration of proficiency in Google Analytics that is available to any individual who has passed the Google Analytics IQ exam.

Why earn an individual qualification? While Google Analytics is easy to use for beginners, it's also a very powerful tool in the hands of knowledgeable users. Qualified users will be effective at leveraging Google Analytics within their organizations and at helping others to do the same.

When you sign up for Google Partners, you'll get access to the free Google Analytics IQ exam.

How to earn your individual qualification

First, you'll need to sign up for Google Partners and create an individual profile. This will give you access to the free exam. Once you’ve passed the exam, you'll be able to access your personalized certificate and public profile page.

The Google Analytics IQ exam tests your knowledge of digital analytics and Google Analytics. To prepare for the exam, you should take the following Analytics Academy courses:

Note The Google Analytics IQ exam is only available in the following languages: simplified Chinese, Czech, Dutch, English, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and Turkish.

Sharing your individual qualification status with others

Once you pass the exam, you'll be able to share your individual qualification status with others by showing them your personalized certificate or Google Partners public profile page. Read each section below to learn how to access each one.

Accessing your personalized certificate

Once you earn your individual qualification, you'll be able to access a personalized, printable certificate from the "My profile" page in your Partners account. Follow the steps below to print your certificate.

Sign in to your Partners account at www.google.com/partners. Click My profile in the "Overview" section. Scroll to the "Certifications and exams" section. You'll see all of the exams that you've passed and certifications that you've earned with their expirations dates. To view and print a certificate, you can either click the name of the certification or click the Print button on the card for the exam that you are certified in.

Accessing your Partners public profile

Once you earn your individual qualification, you'll be able to access a public profile, which is a read-only page that lists all of the certifications/qualifications you've earned, giving you the opportunity to share your certification status with others. This page is a unique URL that's hosted on a google.com domain, and you can choose who can access it.

To get your public profile's URL and choose who can access it, go to the "Public profile" section of your "My profile" page. Keep in mind that by default, your profile is visible to you only.

Here's what will appear on your profile page:

Your name: This name will be the same name that you use for your Google Account. If you'd like to change your name, read the section below on updating your name.

This name will be the same name that you use for your Google Account. If you'd like to change your name, read the section below on updating your name. Agency's name: If your Partners individual profile is affiliated with a company profile, we'll show your agency's name and link to its Partners profile if the profile is published in Google Partner Search.

If your Partners individual profile is affiliated with a company profile, we'll show your agency's name and link to its Partners profile if the profile is published in Google Partner Search. Photo: Your Google+ profile photo will automatically appear on your Partners profile page (note that your Google+ profile photo is always visible to the public). If your Google+ profile doesn't have a photo, then a photo won't appear on your Partners profile page.

Your Google+ profile photo will automatically appear on your Partners profile page (note that your Google+ profile photo is always visible to the public). If your Google+ profile doesn't have a photo, then a photo won't appear on your Partners profile page. Google+ profile: A link to your Google+ profile will automatically appear on your Partners profile page. Keep in mind that you can choose who sees sections of your Google+ profile with certain people. Learn how to choose who can see sections of your Google+ profile.

A link to your Google+ profile will automatically appear on your Partners profile page. Keep in mind that you can choose who sees sections of your Google+ profile with certain people. Learn how to choose who can see sections of your Google+ profile. Certifications: We'll show a list of all the certifications and individual qualifications that you've received.

Tip Not on Google+ yet? If you don't have a Google Account connected to your work email address, learn how to create one and access Google+. If you already have a Google Account connected to your work email address, find out how to add a photo to your Google+ profile.

By default, your profile will be visible to you only, which means that no one will be able to see your profile page even if they have the URL to it. To share your profile with others, you'll need to make it visible to the public. Follow the steps below to edit your profile's visibility settings.

Sign in to your Partners account at www.google.com/partners. Click My profile in the "Overview" section. In the "Public profile" section of the page, click the Share with drop-down menu and select "Public" to make your profile visible to others. If you don't want anyone to be able to access your profile, select "Only you" from the drop-down menu (this setting will be selected by default). Keep in mind that you can change your profile's visibility status at anytime by clicking the Share with drop-down menu and selecting a different setting. Tip If you access your public profile while signed in to your Partners account, your profile's visibility status will appear in a notification at the top of the page.

Updating your name for your certificate or public profile page

If the name that appears on your individual certificate or public profile page is incorrect, you'll need to update that information in your Partners account. To do so, you'll need to edit your Google Account information.

Sign in to your Google Account at accounts.google.com. Click the Edit profile link. You'll go to your Google+ profile page. Click your name to edit it. You'll see a box where you can edit your first or last name. Keep in mind that editing your profile name in Google+ will change your name in all the Google products you use for this account (for example, if your Gmail was linked to that same Google Account, then your name would change in Gmail, too). Keep in mind that you can only change the name on your Google Account three times per year.

Guidelines for communicating your individual qualification status to others

Common questions

The difference between your individual qualification and the Partner badge

Individuals get qualified. Any member of Partners can earn a Google Analytics individual qualification. Once you've passed the Google Analytics IQ exam, you can demonstrate your achievement with a personalized certificate issued by Google.

Any member of Partners can earn a Google Analytics individual qualification. Once you've passed the Google Analytics IQ exam, you can demonstrate your achievement with a personalized certificate issued by Google. Agencies get badged. An agency that meets the requirements for Partner status will earn the Google Partner badge and be allowed to promote itself as a "Google Partner." Note that an agency doesn't become a "Google Partner" simply by joining the program.

The difference between your individual qualification and being a Google Analytics Certified Partner

Your individual qualification demonstrates basic proficiency in Google Analytics. You may share a link to your Partners profile. Google does not offer a Google Analytics IQ badge. Please note that creating or displaying a Google Analytics IQ badge is a violation of Google's branding policies and may infringe Google's trademark rights. Your qualification may be revoked if you create or display a badge.

A GACP is a professional services organization that has passed a series of stringent requirements to become an approved authorized consultant. These companies are listed on the Google Analytics professional services support page. The Google Analytics Individual Qualification is for any individual who wants or needs to demonstrate proficiency in Google Analytics. Having a Google Analytics individual qualification does not by itself qualify you to be a Google Analytics Certified Partner. For information on how to become an Authorized Consultant, please visit this page.