*Vedic Astrology, or Jyotish, is one of the oldest sciences on the planet and considered a relative of astronomy. It is an important and valuable part of the ancient Vedic texts. This complex, logic-based and also intuitive science, has survived thousands of years in India’s Vedic tradition and is still considered a highly valuable tool of guidance and life insight. It is not a religion, but rather a philosophical understanding of human and cosmic existence. In Sanskrit, Jyoti means light. Essentially, the study of Jyotish is the study of light and how we interact with the cosmic light—within us and within the cosmos. Vedic Astrology, or the sidereal approach to astrology, casts charts differently than Western, or Tropical astrology. The meanings, implications and purpose of Jyotish are therefore different, as are the details used for prediction and the indications given below.

Even though Jyotish astrology is considered to be soli-lunar, in many regards the Moon is considered the most vital piece of the karmic life map.

The Moon shares crucial insights about our inner landscape—our internal realms. Here we navigate our feeling and emotional body experience—a unique attribute of being a human.

The Moon (Chandra in Sanskrit) is the intelligence and intuition of each being. It is the nourisher of life, which offers us soma, divine nectar. The Moon represents the universal Ma and the Mother within, as well as our inner intelligence.

The Sun is connected to our soul and the sheath that houses the soul, whereas the Moon is connected to the wisdom and intelligence within the soul.

In the Jyotish chart, the placement of the Moon will show how aligned a being is with sacred intuition. The Moon will show what nourishment is available to us and how we will utilize our inner intelligence. In Vedic astrology, the Moon is of equal, if not greater, importance to the Sun in many regards. For if the Sun is strong, but the Moon is weak, how will the soul be nurtured and supported?

Moon is intimately connected to the Mother, the nurturing quality of life. It shares the essential intelligence of life that gives us comfort, nourishment and emotional support, as well as our requirements for love and affection. The connection of Moon to our emotions and our psychological state is not accidental. After all, our emotional body and its harmony is intimately connected to our relationship with prana, life force. Feelings make for a joyful life or a challenging life, and they move quickly—just like the Moon!

Our father plays a major role in our creation. In the Vedic understanding, he is the seed that sparks our life. However, it is the Moon’s qualities that are like the soil. Mother offers the womb, the nurturing and the container for the seed to grow. The Mother gives the vital ingredients for sustaining life it self. Without her, we would be lost, misguided and lacking the ability to live life fully nourished. Our connection to Moon, to Ma, to mother, directly impacts our ability to live in harmony with life and feel the support and nurturing life has to offer.

How well are you able to be nourished?

The Moon sign is the determining factor of our nourishment and wisdom. Assessing the Moon in your Jyotish chart will reveal many important details about your inner wisdom, emotional body, the connection you have with your mother and if you are able to receive the sacred wisdom of life.

Step 1. Identify Your Moon.

First, notice where the Moon is located in your chart. The abbreviation is likely MO.

What sign is it in? The sign will share a lot about your Moon’s disposition, but there are a few other factors to consider.

What is the symbol of your Moon sign and the element that rules over it? What can you learn about your Moon with these details? Follow these guidelines for extra support.

Step 2. Who Rules Over Your Moon?

The planetary influence upon your Moon sign is another vital piece of information. What is the planetary ruler of your Moon sign? No two planets express themselves the same way. A Mars ruled sign acts very differently than a Saturn ruled sign. What can you determine about your Moon sign based on its planetary ruler? Read this for more about planetary rulers.

Step 3. Where Does Your Wisdom and Nourishment Come From?

The house (or bhava in Sanskrit) that your Moon sits in shares vital information about what you need for nourishment and inner support. Is your Moon comfortable in its home? Does it feel safe? What type of support does the house give you? The support will be on an emotional body level, which is a vital part of your receptivity, the ability to feel the nourishment of life.

1st House: Sense of self, worldly house, being seen, ego, appearance, intelligence.

2nd House: Nourishment, wealth, support, gems, speaking, voice.

3rd House: Communication, writing, courage, the arts, creativity, self expression, using the hands.

4th House: Home, land, mother, emotions, spirituality and moksha.

5th House: Children, creativity, romance, intuition, knowledge.

6th House: Enemies, bad habits, healing, disease, legal issues, competition, debt.

7th House: Relationships, others, partner, sexuality, desire, travel, trade.

8th House: Death, disease, transformation, transcendence, vulnerability, mysticism.

9th House: Dharma, guru, wisdom, education, foreign travels, fortune, religion.

10th House: Career, achievement, success, father, action, fame, social status.

11th House: Gains, wealth, income, friends, desires, fulfillment of desire.

12th House: Endings, loss, liberation, marriage, retreat, foreign lands, alone time.

Step 4. Putting it all together.

It’s time to combine all the layers now and derive some meaning from it all. What can you determine about your Moon sign based on all the previous steps? What type of emotional body wisdom are you aligned with and how do you seek your nourishment in life? Remember the Moon will affect how you feel nourishment in your life. This is the inner wisdom and support that comes from your mother and the feminine powers within your family lineage. What gifts and resources are present? What challenges?

Want more details about your Moon Sign? Read This.

~

Ready to learn more? Join me for my August Jyotish Basics Classes!

Don’t have a copy of your chart? Get one here.

* This Article is relevant for reading a North Indian Style chart only.

Relephant bonus videos:



~

Author: Saraswati J.

Editor: Toby Israel

Photo: Evelyn Flint/Daydreaming Images at Flickr