These eye rolls are not meant to be disrespectful, Morris explained. It is just that the label stuff can feel a bit ridiculous.

Photo

Can Morris — who last year against Mexico scored his first national team goal for the United States while he was still in college, and who, at 21, is Seattle’s leading scorer in his first professional season — be the first great American goal scorer to star abroad? Will he lead the national team to the glory its fans crave? Will he (finally) deliver America its own Cristiano Ronaldo?

Such questions are not original. They were asked long ago about Jamar Beasley and Eddie Gaven and, more recently, about Christian Pulisic and Julian Green. You may remember Green from the 2014 World Cup and, unfortunately for him, not much else. Those questions were asked about Freddy Adu, who was in an advertising campaign with Pelé when he was 14 and was so inspired by the experience that he has since gone on to play for 13 teams, and counting.

And yet, the label stuff persists. When Morris signed with the Sounders earlier this year, an excited member of the club’s social media team posted side-by-side photos of Morris and Lionel Messi on Twitter, a move that the club’s majority owner, Adrian Hanauer, acknowledged was “unfortunate,” if only because it had shredded any chance that outsiders might show restraint in making comparisons.

“That isn’t the way we look at it, anyway,” Morris’s father, Mike, said. “If any of that happens, great. But we just want him to have a long, successful, healthy professional career. Would that be so bad?”

It would not. But patience and nuance are not exactly the attributes most often associated with sports fans, especially American soccer fans. Morris, his family, the Sounders and the fans also know the soccer calendar: Over the next 22 months, the United States national team will, it hopes, qualify for and prepare to play in the 2018 World Cup in Russia. The team is in a time of transition, with older veterans at several key positions making it necessary for Manager Jurgen Klinsmann to look elsewhere for a new star.

Morris, many believe, could be that bright light. On Sunday, he was named to the roster for two World Cup qualifying matches this weekend. After being left off the team for this summer’s Copa América Centenario run, Morris is determined to show Klinsmann that he can deliver consistently.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Perhaps most important, he is focused on dealing with the scrutiny that has inspired the eye rolls and clearly weighed on him, at least to this point in his fairly tumultuous first professional season.

Photo

“I do see it affect me,” he said. “I do, and it does. I scored that goal against Mexico last year, and I had no idea what would happen after that.”

He hesitated, as if trying to form a bold addendum. Then he shook his head. “I just never thought this much pressure would be put on me,” he said.

Reacting to Criticism

Shortly after lunch Friday, Morris climbed into a luxury bus parked next to the Sounders’ training facility. Taylor Twellman, a former forward for the national team and now the top soccer analyst for ESPN, was going to interview Morris ahead of the Sounders’ game with Portland on Sunday.

Their rapport was good. Twellman has a contagious enthusiasm and asks pointed questions. Morris, despite sitting in searing heat because the noisy air-conditioning had to be turned off during taping, was candid, if typically self-effacing. He talked about the rivalry with Portland and about the Sounders’ new Uruguayan attacker, Nicolás Lodeiro. He talked with emotion about being one of the few professional soccer players with Type 1 diabetes, a reality that he hopes will inspire others.

The only hiccup came when Twellman asked, through a wide smile, “So, do you have a left foot?”

Morris hesitated. The question was meant to give Morris a chance to make a joke about his perceived reliance on his right foot — a point Morris has conceded is not unfair — but upon hearing it, Morris frowned. Later, he said that he was not bothered by the question, but that it was emblematic of how he was learning to react to criticism.

Put another way: His reaction was about the label stuff.

Can he really become that true American star while favoring one foot? The no-left-foot trope is raised often on Twitter, Morris said, and there have been times when he has struggled not to aggressively explain that he is, in fact, pigeon-toed — his feet naturally point inward instead of straight ahead — which makes it more natural for him to flick the ball with the outside of his right foot than open his hips to play with the inside of his left.

“There are so many times I’ve wanted to get into it, and I think it’s because I feel like soccer is my identity,” Morris said. “So when people are bashing me for soccer, I feel like they’re bashing me as a person.”

Photo

His teammate Hérculez Gómez, a striker who has spent 14 years playing in Mexico and in M.L.S., said he believed that introspection like that, rather than the reflexive bravado of some young pros, might give Morris a better chance to thrive than some of the previously anointed young players.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“A lot of guys get that taste of success and buy into what they hear,” Gomez said. “He didn’t buy into it. He doesn’t think he’s done anything. And to me, that’s the best sign yet.”

Lagerwey, the Sounders’ general manager, thinks that outlook is a direct result of Morris’s staying at Stanford for three years instead of turning professional as a teenager. Being around smart people in all disciplines, Lagerwey said, “reminds people that you’re not necessarily such a special snowflake in terms of the rest of the world, and from a life perspective, that can be valuable.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Staying at Stanford, however, was not a universally praised decision. Neither was Morris’s choice last winter to pass up a chance to sign with Werder Bremen, a German club, to join his hometown Sounders. Among those who might have picked a different path for Morris is Klinsmann, who has made no secret of his preference that young American players go abroad.

But this season has been formative. After his much-publicized decision to join M.L.S., Morris missed a clear scoring chance in his opening game — “the reaction to that was when I first realized how different things were now,” he said — and he was scoreless through five matches.

The team struggled, too, winning only four of its first 15 games, a start that eventually led the team to fire its longtime coach, Sigi Schmid. Then Morris and the under-23 national team failed to qualify for the Rio Olympics, and Klinsmann left him off the Copa América roster.

That last one, in particular, stung. To get away, Morris took his three dogs — Minnie, Lucky and Angel — on a hike up nearby Snoqualmie Mountain. He needed to get away from the TV and the internet and his phone. He needed to get away from the label stuff.

Photo

“It hurt him,” said Schmetzer, the Sounders’ new coach. “But then I think he saw that it could also be an opportunity.”

Heart of the Sounders

Late Sunday afternoon in Portland, there was little for the Sounders to be excited about. The archrival Timbers had just thrashed them, 4-2. But one of the Sounders’ rare high points came just after halftime, when Lodeiro whipped in a perfect cross from the flank and Morris rifled a header into the net.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It was Morris’s ninth goal of the season, and his fifth since the Copa América snub. With Clint Dempsey out indefinitely while he is evaluated for an irregular heartbeat, Morris, more than ever, is the heart of the Sounders’ attack.

That goal against the Timbers, then, was important, but there have been other notable moments for Morris recently, too. A powerful run with the ball at his feet as he took on a defender. A hard, low shot that forced a rebound in front of goal. A strong track back to help on defense. Even Morris acknowledges that there remain too many missed chances in front of goal — “My finishing is still raw,” he said — but the skills that got him the Label are clearly there.

Still, it has all come so quickly. Growing up, Morris was not a fixture on regional teams or in all-star programs. Five years ago, he was not even a forward (he played midfield). Three years ago, he was on a Sounders academy team asking Dempsey for a picture at the end of a game. (“I think it’s still on my computer somewhere,” he said.) Then came the call-up to national team camp — the first for an active college player in nearly 20 years — and the goal against Mexico.

Now, suddenly, he is at the fore of a transition to youth for his home club and maybe for his country. It is flattering and demanding. It is heady and heavy. It is endless.

It is the label stuff.

“I can handle it,” Morris said. His eyes never moved.