The book opens with “Mannahatta,” a vignette evoking the 1613 landfall of Juan Rodriguez, a black Dominican sailor and Manhattan’s first immigrant. Disembarking alone from his canoe, Rodriguez finds himself so entranced by the landscape and Algonquian language that he resolves to desert the crew of the Jonge Tobias — “shielding this place and its particularities from their imaginations” — to join the Indians. A counterspell to the arrival of that lost génocidaire Columbus, the moment is within history but not of it, an overture suggesting alternative chronologies.

Other stories mourn disfigured potential. “Cold” dissects the final hours of Robert Allen Cole, a turn-of-the-century vaudevillian, ragtime composer and tragic pioneer of African-American theater. Carving a Faustian niche for black musicians in a deeply racist genre, Cole is most famous today for “Under the Bamboo Tree.” He also co-wrote more than 150 “coon songs” and introduced the first New York musical conceived, directed and performed by black entertainers. Unlike his more famous collaborators, John Rosamond and James Weldon Johnson — the brothers wrote “Lift Every Voice and Sing”; James Weldon Johnson was executive secretary of the N.A.A.C.P. from 1920 to 1930 — Cole did not survive the coliseum of commercial disenfranchisement and requisite self-denigration that encircled black artists of his era. He killed himself in 1911 while recovering from a mental breakdown at a hotel in the Catskills.

Cole’s is a story few writers would think to tell. Remembered now, if at all, as a footnote or an embarrassment, he is neither an overlooked hero to rescue from erasure nor a tragic martyr like the quixotic John Brown of James McBride’s “The Good Lord Bird,” the defeated Béhanzin of Maryse Condé’s “The Last of the African Kings” or the filicidal Sethe of Toni Morrison’s “Beloved.” Undaunted, Keene finds Cole sweating through his lavender linen suit, tormented by “devil’s arias” on his dying day. Lyrics from his “coon songs” interrupt the text, while a tantalizing blues — “undreamt, unsummoned … terrible samplings of the old and the unfamiliar” — drifts beyond his reach.

This description could double as an epitome of “Counternarratives” itself. Keene has a Borgesian flair for invented primary texts and pseudoscholarly ephemera. “Rivers,” a postscript to “Huckleberry Finn” narrated by Jim (now a Union army veteran), begins as an interview in the style of the W.P.A.’s Depression-era oral histories. “Blues,” which imagines an affair between Langston Hughes and his Spanish translator, the Mexican poet Xavier Villaurrutia, is a fantasy spun from the slenderest evidence: the latter’s dedication of an erotic poem to Hughes and the knowledge that their time in New York and Mexico City overlapped. Disguised as marginalia, these stories are hard to imagine fitting into any novel. Larger narratives would only destroy that apartness from the chain of events which gives them escape velocity.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Haunted by original sin and nourished by dreams of upward mobility, family sagas rarely extricate themselves from a sense of inevitability. They are about how the world came to be as it is, and even when they include characters outside the rubric of struggle and reproduction, it is usually a way to ruminate on their own boundaries. Toni Morrison coined the phrase “black surrogacy” to describe how blackness in classic American literature marked the limits of rational experience. Family novels often position queerness similarly, using it as a counterpoint or rebuke to the patriarchal dynamics driving the plot.

“No one knows my name — or my history!” boasts Reuben Bedford Walker III, the jockey who rides the Forges’ prize filly in “The Sport of Kings.” Clearly marked as queer, he mocks both the aristocratic pretensions of his employers and another black character’s self-consciously stereotyped family debilities. “I piss on family and order,” Walker declares. “No mother made me, I bore my own damn self.” Quey, the son of a Fante woman and a British slave trader in the 18th-century Ghana of “Homegoing,” encounters an alternative to the novel’s fateful trans-Atlantic course in his attraction to Cudjo, a childhood friend and wrestling companion. Both a tragic mulatto and tragically queer, Quey briefly considers an invitation to visit Cudjo’s village — even fantasizes about living in his compound like a wife — but ultimately capitulates to the white, patriarchal role his father has marked for him: slaver. The novel’s subsequent generations process in this betrayal’s wake, as though if only Quey had spurned his father’s dirty work for Cudjo’s wrestler’s arms, some quantum of the diaspora’s tragedy might have been averted.

In “Counternarratives,” queerness is not a wrinkle in generational time, but a subject — and lens — in its own right. Glimpsed from the peripheries of gender and sexuality, history confesses concealed depths and old stories reveal unsuspected trajectories. The novella “A Letter on the Trials of the Counterreformation in New Lisbon” begins deceptively as a story of “civilization” in distress, adopting the portentous register of Joseph Conrad’s “Heart of Darkness.” A Jesuit priest, Joaquim D’Azevedo, arrives to lead a failing monastery in Alagoas, on the frontier of Portuguese Brazil. His predecessors have either died or disappeared, and Catholicism’s influence is threatened by the monks’ slackening morals, imminent Dutch invasion and an ineffable malevolence that seems to revolve around one of the monastery’s eight African slaves: João Baptista, caught one night in women’s clothing trying to burn the compound down. The ensuing confrontation ends with the slave liberating his master. Baptista — who is really Burunbana the “Jinbada,” a bigender seer sexually involved with many of the men at the monastery — discovers that D’Azevedo is a Jewish converso, secretly adherent to his old faith, and endangered if he remains at Alagoas. He spirits the Jewish Jesuit to a hidden settlement — possibly Palmares, a city founded by runaway slaves that before its 1695 destruction counted more than 10,000 inhabitants — and from there to Dutch territory, where he is free to practice his ancestral faith.

Burunbana’s clairvoyance echoes the slant reappraisal of the past in “Counternarratives,” one that proceeds not along the vector of generations — each a kernel containing the next — but the strange byways of identities in flux. Catholics become Jews, Portuguese captaincies are subsumed by Dutch colonies or supplanted by armed fugitive settlements and purported apostles of white Christian civilization are rescued by queer representatives of African spirituality. History is restored to miraculous contingency, no longer fraught with the present.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

There is much to be said for heredity’s tethers, and for the writers who unravel them. But art has other ways to humanize time’s passage, forms emphasizing lines of continuity and species of kinship that family sagas — still the dominant genre for putting history’s course on an individual scale — largely ignore. Keene echoes writers like the Uruguayan Eduardo Galeano, whose three-volume “Memory of Fire” chronicles the Americas in a monumental collage of myths, crimes, encounters and skirmishes in a long anticolonial struggle. Or Patrick Chamoiseau, whose novel “Texaco” recounts Martinique’s history as remembered by the insurgent residents of a shantytown menaced by city planners.

Among contemporary American writers, the poets Layli Long Soldier, Robin Coste Lewis and Susan Howe stand out as fellow travelers, ventriloquists of the archive who wring new voices from settled texts. Their liberating attention to the interstitial and unwritten contrasts with the family saga’s sentimental attachment to endurance, what the scholar Lauren Berlant describes as a “confusion between survival and freedom.”

Entranced by the ancestor who crossed on the Mayflower, escaped from the plantation or started anew in a hostile foreign city, we too often limit our retrospective gaze to those predecessors who made provisions for a future we recognize in our own present. We deprive ourselves of people whose visions were never realized, who left no obvious legacy. More people have lived on earth than the tendentious nets of genealogy — inevitably tangled in the chronologies of faith, race, nation — can catch, and we are connected to them by threads more subtle, and resonances more profound, than have yet been explored. Imagining those lives, deeply and without the prejudice that they must be prologue to our world, can be both radical and beautiful.