Honestly, I don’t think I’ll ever go back now that I’ve figured this out. Summer vacation in Scotland was so much better than Chinese takeout ever could be.

Ella Saitta:

I use a method that is cobbled together from T. Harv Eker’s method, and “The Richest Man in Babylon.” May sound a bit floaty, but it has helped my husband and I go from €0 to €10,000 in savings in one year time, without having to forgo any pleasures.

You divide all your income into 6 categories:

• 50% goes to necessities (bills, rent/mortgage, groceries)

• 10% goes to future financial freedom (investments, etc.)

• 10% goes to saving for spending (new washing machine, holiday, etc.)

• 10% goes to education (we use it for university tuition, books, movies, museum visits and gym membership; anything that counts as personal development)

• 10% goes to giving (we had to get used to this one, we use it for charities and for gifts to friends and family)

• 10% goes to play (we use it for eating at restaurants, video games, you name it)

Michael McShane

YNAB = You Need A Budget

This software makes it possible to answer intelligently the question, “Can I afford this?” It’s a pain to get it up and running, and it requires frequent maintenance, in the sense of entering data and setting priorities, but it is SO worth the trouble.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Smarter Living Newsletter A weekly roundup of the best advice from The Times on living a better, smarter, more fulfilling life. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Very quickly saves its own cost, and replaces anxiety about finances with actual knowledge about one’s precise financial situation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Katie Coyle, with advice for couples:

Monthly recap with my partner to review our month-over-month spending and talk about where we overspent. We also mark the calendar on nights we go out to eat as a visual reminder, and commit to eating homemade lunch rather than going out.

Margaret Ryan

I save $5 bills. Never spend them. Just put them away in my drawer. When I have 20, I take them to the bank and exchange them for a $100 bill. By years’ end I usually have about a grand, which I use for Christmas tips and gifts — and not running up my credit cards.

Rami Harawi

I ran a forensic assessment to find small recurring expenses I call “ghost expenses.” I saved $125/month in unknown expenses: bank account maintenance fees $18/month, an unused Audible account for $9/month, Unused Premium subscription to a Cloud storage app ($9/month), Unused “upgrades” in my Carrier and Cable/Internet subscriptions ($40/month), etc. As you suggested in your article, I immediately began an auto-transfer of $100/month to my investment account once I found those.

Finally, Smarter Living contributor and author of the forthcoming personal finance book “Get Money” (March 2018) Kristin Wong:

I love using apps to help save money. There are plenty to choose from, but Tip Yourself and Qapital are two of my favorites. You save a few bucks whenever you complete a goal or a task (or just whenever you feel like it). Some people use Tip Yourself to save money after a workout, for example. And Qapital is great because you can create rules for saving and the app will save for you automatically. Instead of feeling like a chore, saving is kind of fun when you use an app, which makes you a lot more motivated to save.

Got any other budget-saving tips? Let’s hear ’em! Email me at tim@nytimes.com and write “Budget” in the subject line, or tweet me @timherrera.

Have a great week!

—Tim

Best of Smarter Living

The Best Running Stride? The One That Comes Naturally Even beginning runners tend to settle into the stride that is most efficient for them, a new study found.

How to Take Care of Your Clothes Buying clothes built to last is one thing — but there’s a lot you can do to make them endure. Here are the experts’ tips for wearing, storing and even cleaning your clothes correctly to prolong the life of your favorite items.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

5 Shows to See if You’re in New York in September Group weddings, Korean pop, a superannuated Peter Pan and a transgender Emily Post are among the promising theatrical experiences of September.

How Exercise Could Help You Learn a New Language Working out during a language class amplifies an adult’s ability to memorize, retain and understand new vocabulary.

A Smarter Way to Clean Your Home Take this guided tour of your home — from the kitchen and bathroom to the bedroom and living areas — to learn the basic rules of cleaning as well as some tips and short cuts that will help you clean thoroughly and efficiently, starting now.

How to Be Better at Managing Your Stress Don’t let stress get you down. Here are ways to deal with it, and even use it to make you stronger.

What We’re Reading

■ Let neuroscience help you be more emotionally intelligent.

■ A guide to teeth whitening.

■ Here’s a free Yale course on how to listen to music.

■ Watch the N.F.L. without cable.

■ Should you let your parents subsidize your life?

■ Financial confessional: “I was a check-bouncing, collector-dodging accountant!”