I firmly believe that vegetarians and vegans should never have to relegate themselves to ordering a meager salad when dining out. A healthy vegetarian or vegan meal can be "invented" at any kind of restaurant whether or not the options exist on the menu—all it takes is a willingness to ask questions and make specific requests.

Here are some examples of vegetarian and vegan meals you can "tweak" at your favorite restaurants and in a variety of dining scenarios.

Asian

The plethora of vegetable dishes and the relative absence of dairy makes it easy to eat vegetarian or vegan at an Asian restaurant. Order steamed vegetables, stir-fried tofu, lo mein, brown rice, or any other meatless offering at a Chinese place. Go for miso soup and a vegetable sushi roll if you're eating a Japanese meal. Thai, Vietnamese, and Korean restaurants usually offer multiple vegetarian options as well.

Advertisement

Pro tip: always ask to make sure your meal won't contain any fish sauce or stock.

Barbecue

Although it seems like this category would be the toughest one of all, it's actually simple—just go for the side dishes! Build a "sampler platter" of sides like grilled corn or asparagus (vegans, hold the butter), a dinner roll or two, steamed broccoli, a baked sweet potato with cinnamon and sugar, or even steak fries.

Advertisement

Strict vegans can ask if your veggies can be cooked on a separate grill or otherwise apart from where the meat is cooked.

Breakfast and Brunch

Whether you find yourself at a Denny's or a fancy-schmancy brunch spot, there are lots of options when it comes to breakfast food. Fresh fruit, oatmeal, hash browns, granola, bagels, and toast are a few classics.

Vegans should request that your oatmeal be prepared with water instead of milk, and always remind your server that you don't want butter on your toast.

French

French cuisine is notorious for its liberal use of butter and cream, but vegans can bypass that (no pun intended) with dishes like ratatouille, veggie soup, steamed vegetables, and baked or fried potatoes. When in doubt, check out the side dish menu, and if you're vegan, ask for your order to be prepared without butter.

Advertisement

Pro tip: ask in advance whether soups are made with animal stock. Vegans: ask if breads contain egg or dairy.

Indian

An Indian restaurant is a vegetarian paradise. Although many curries are made with ghee (clarified butter) and cream, many Indian restaurants will omit the ghee and substitute coconut cream if you ask for a vegan version—and it's delicious! Appetizers and sides like pappadum, pakora, veggie samosas, roti, and paratha are also excellent vegan choices.

Advertisement

Vegans should avoid naan, which, although delicious, is usually made with yogurt.

Italian

Fresh-baked bread with olive oil is my favorite starter of all time. Don't forget bruschetta and minestrone soup! You may think spaghetti marinara is the only entree possibility, but many places also offer a pasta primavera or spaghetti pomodoro, a sauce made with fresh tomatoes and olive oil.

Advertisement

Pro tip: make sure no chicken broth is used in the vegetable soup or pasta sauce. If you're vegan and are ordering garlic bread, request that it be prepared with oil rather than butter.

Mexican

Vegans—think Mexican food is no good without the cheese? Think again. After digging into the tortilla chips with salsa and/or guacamole, I like to ask for tacos, enchiladas, or a burrito filled with black beans instead of meat, plus a side of Spanish rice.

Advertisement

Pro tip: ask your server whether the rice is prepared with chicken stock, and make sure the beans haven't been cooked in lard.

Middle Eastern

Hummus (my favorite food in the whole world) is a no-brainer, especially with freshly-baked pita bread, but there's also baba ghanouj, dolmas, falafel, and tabbouleh for appetizers. For the main event, veggie kebabs over rice pilaf is always a winner.

Advertisement

Pro tip: verify there's no animal stock in the rice. Vegans can request that nothing be garnished with feta cheese, just in case.

Pizza

Vegans don't have to give up pizza night with friends! Just get your portion of the pie cheeseless (and ask for extra sauce instead) and pile on the veggies—roasted red peppers, artichoke hearts, kalamata olives, and roasted garlic are my favorites.

Advertisement

Most pizza crusts are naturally vegan, but you can ask to make sure there's no dairy or honey in there.

Remember, whenever possible, check out a restaurant's online menu ahead of time to help you create a "plan of attack." It's always best to be prepared!

How to Eat Vegan When It's Not on the Menu | Menuism

Amber Shea Crawley, creator and author of the popular food blog Chef Amber Shea, is a classically trained chef, linguist, and writer in Kansas City, Missouri. Specializing in healthful, plant-rich food, she is the author of the cookbooks Practically Raw and Practically Raw Desserts as well as the ebook The REAL FOOD Cleanse. Amber blogs at www.chefambershea.com and can also be found on Facebook and Twitter.



Menuism is the best way to find restaurant reviews and food photos.

Image remixed from Andril Gorulko and violetblue (Shutterstock).

