Coach Bruce Arena hinted at lineup changes because of the conditions, perhaps like the myriad switches he made in June for a quick turnaround trip to Mexico City, where the United States earned a valuable draw.

But as critical as maintaining their stamina will be keeping their poise, something too many United States players failed to do in the loss to Costa Rica. There were visible signs of frustration not only from Christian Pulisic, who was subjected to extra defensive attention and a handful of hard fouls, but also from others who might be expected to bottle their exasperation more adeptly than an 18-year-old.

Clint Dempsey, the former United States captain, picked up a late yellow card for throwing an elbow at Costa Rica defender Johnny Acosta after coming on as a second-half substitute. Shortly before that, forward Jozy Altidore picked up a yellow for shoving Costa Rica midfielder Johan Venegas. Together, Dempsey and Altidore have played 246 games for the national team.

Photo

The yellow card for Altidore was his second in this qualifying round, which means he is suspended for Tuesday’s match.

“Well, Jozy doesn’t like playing in hot, humid climates, so that’s a plus, I guess, for our team,” Arena said, unable to quell his sarcasm.

This Concacaf World Cup cycle is particularly unforgiving when it comes to discipline. Since the beginning of the previous fourth round of qualifying, a one-game suspension accompanies every second yellow card. There was no reset before the start of the current 10-game hexagonal round.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

That means six Americans face suspension for their next yellow card: not just Dempsey, but also Bradley, the central defenders Geoff Cameron and Matt Besler, and midfielders Paul Arriola and Alejandro Bedoya. With the Americans’ next game — against Panama in Orlando, Fla., on Oct. 6 — perhaps their most crucial one, especially if they stumble Tuesday, any discipline against Honduras could have serious implications for the team’s chances of making the World Cup.

Asked how players’ yellow-card situations might affect his lineup decisions, Arena said: “Officiating in Concacaf is highly unpredictable. You have no idea what’s going to go on in games. It seems to me that the referees are refraining from issuing yellow cards because of that rule, which is — without going into a long debate — it’s just a stupid rule.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He added: “Over 18 games, I think you’d be punished for having a second yellow card. That’s essentially what it is. And I think it keeps cards in the pockets of referees.”

Bradley said that carrying a yellow card — something he has to do since picking up one in a qualifier in Costa Rica last November — requires discipline. Picking up a second for a challenge in a dangerous spot is one thing. Picking one up for yelling at the referee, or for shoving an opponent, is another.

“You have to be extra careful not to get a stupid yellow card, because the last thing you’d want is to be missing a game because you couldn’t control yourself,” Bradley said. “You let things go in the wrong moment, but you still have to play. You have to make the plays you need, you have to compete at the highest level, and at the end of it, let the chips fall where they may.”

Bradley said that he understands well what his team will be up against on Tuesday. He was on the field here four years ago when the United States — playing under a midafternoon sun in a slightly more forgiving February — lost to Honduras, 2-1, in the opener of the final round of qualifying. The Americans recovered from that defeat and coasted into the 2014 World Cup in Brazil.

This time, the margin for error is much more fine, leaving less hope for a team that loses games — or its head.