Sebastian Kennerknecht/Minden Pictures

THE iconic snow leopard might no longer be classed as an endangered species, if some scientists have their way. That may sound like a conservation win, but others warn the move could backfire.

Since 1986, the International Union for Conservation of Nature has designated snow leopards as “endangered”. Now the IUCN is considering reclassifying them as “vulnerable”, meaning the risk of extinction is less urgent. The recommendation was written by Rodney Jackson of the Snow Leopard Conservancy and other experts.

Estimates published in 2016 put the Asian cat’s population at around 8000, rather than 5300 as previously thought. And although some sub-populations are shrinking, we have no clear evidence of an overall decline (Oryx, doi.org/ccjf). This means they are not as badly threatened as we thought, according to the IUCN’s criteria.

Advertisement

Changing the snow leopard’s status will alter public perceptions of the animal. “The word ‘endangered’ carries this aura about it,” says Tom McCarthy of Panthera, a wild cat conservation group. “It’s a powerful, evocative word. What is a ‘vulnerable’ animal?”

McCarthy supports the change, however, saying the new listing would still mean snow leopards are in trouble. “It’s slightly better off than we thought, but it’s still facing a high level of extinction.”

Still threatened

One issue is that because snow leopards live in remote regions, the population estimates could still alter significantly. “I think the people opposed to this [redesignation] bring up this point, that we’ve only surveyed 2 per cent of the range,” says McCarthy. “I’ll be first to admit we need to do a lot more. The estimates are educated guesses.” More robust surveys could include genetic testing and using drones.

However, the big worry is that reclassifying the cats might dampen the drive to protect them. “How are we going to get people behind this species and get the dollars we hope for?” asks Beth Schaefer, general curator at the Los Angeles Zoo. “If you say they’re not endangered, people go ‘ah OK’, and they move on.”

Problems clearly remain. Last year, Panthera, Traffic and the WWF reported that snow leopard trafficking is big business in Central Asia. The cats have become less picky about hunting livestock – perhaps because warming temperatures have disrupted their usual prey – so people are targeting them, and this feeds into the illegal wildlife trade.

“Given that wild felids are globally in danger of extinction through poaching, trophy hunting, and other threats, maintaining strong legal protections for these species is critical,” says Anna Frostic, senior attorney at the Humane Society.

“It’s not time to take our foot off the gas in the conservation process,” says Jean-Gaël Collomb, executive director of the Wildlife Conservation Network. “This is still an animal with a small population across a very big range with active threats, most likely still declining, so we shouldn’t misinterpret reclassification.”