A Good Food-Tracking App

On my fitness journey this year (a New Year’s resolution of sorts), I realized that I could work out plenty but that more measurable changes came when I started tracking my food intake.

For me that meant using an app called Lose It!, my favorite of the many, many food-trackers out there. Other great apps I’ve been recommended include MyFitnessPal and MyPlate. Most of these work on a freemium model: Some features are free, but you can upgrade to a paid version with more features.

These aren’t just for weight loss; simply tracking what goes into your body can show you ways to cut out or add foods to your overall diet. (There can be other benefits to food tracking, too.) For me this was revelatory. For instance, I never really realized how much pizza I ate until I wrote it down every single time. (It was ... a lot.) Now five months into using a tracker, my overall diet is better than it has ever been.

Light Therapy Lamp

Winter is coming! (Groan, sorry, I’m having “Game of Thrones” withdrawals already.) With it comes seasonal affective disorder, or SAD. It’s a real thing!

For some people, light therapy lamps can help stave off some of the symptoms. How? Quoth The Wirecutter, “Far from being a fringe or ‘alternative’ purported remedy for SAD, light therapy has been clinically shown to work to alleviate symptoms in over 60 studies in serious scientific publications” by helping our bodies stay on a more natural sleep-wake cycle.

The Wirecutter’s pick is the Carex Day-Light Classic Plus.

White Noise Machine

Eagle-eyed readers will recognize this from a previous list, and I’m including it again for good measure. The thing just works, and it can help you get the most restful sleep possible. As I wrote last time, these little devices can make it easier to fall asleep and stay asleep by fighting noise with noise: “The white noise basically creates a wall of sound defense, protecting you from intruding noises that could engage your brain during sleep.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Smarter Living Newsletter A weekly roundup of the best advice from The Times on living a better, smarter, more fulfilling life. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Wirecutter’s pick is the LectroFan by ASTI.

Spiralizer

Making your own meals is the surest path to better eating, and one of my favorite ways to do that is to make veggies more interesting. There’s no better way to do that than spiralizing them.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Zoodles — a longtime favorite meal of mine — will change how you think about veggies. They’re noodle substitutes that generally take on the flavor of whatever meal you throw them in (how about some of these?), and they’re an easy way to get more greens in your diet.

The OXO Good Grips Spiralizer is The Wirecutter’s favorite.

What’s a cheap-ish item that has helped you live a little healthier? Let me know! Write me at tim@nytimes.com and put “My item” in the subject line, or tweet me @timherrera.

Have a great week!

—Tim

Best of Smarter Living

How to Navigate Social Media Boundaries in a Relationship As a sex therapist, I never imagined I’d spend so much time talking about social media.

Exercise as a Weight-Loss Strategy Pushing yourself during exercise sometimes affects appetite in surprising ways, a new study found.

The Best Running Stride? The One That Comes Naturally Even beginning runners tend to settle into the stride that is most efficient for them, a new study found.

Recipes for Your Labor Day Cookout What are you going to cook for summer’s last hurrah? We have so many delicious ideas right here.

8 Ways to Tackle Long-Haul Flights With Children A carefully plotted parental playbook can help with meltdowns and maladies.

Your Catch-Up Guide to the Best Shows Returning This Fall “Game of Thrones” notwithstanding, this summer was a bit slow for TV. Not so in the next couple of months, when many of our favorites come roaring back.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What We’re Reading

■ A $20 dishwasher safe cutting board for the at-home chef.

■ Ditch the Polaroids in favor of “printable” GIFs.

■ Fear not the intelligent robots. Worry about the dumb ones.

■ Before and after strength training, here’s what to eat.

■ Compare and despair: How to get over feeling envious.

■ How much water should we be drinking?