When you consider what White preaches, you understand why Trump likes it so much. That's because the Word of Faith says that God wants you to be rich and shows favor by making you rich. So if you aren't living on a private island that has rivers flowing with champagne and caviar, God hates you. On the other hand, if you have lots of money, that is literally God pointing you out to the rest of humanity and showing off how great you are. For a billionaire like Trump, even one who inherited his initial wealth, you can see why this is a tempting way to look at things. Mainline Christianity involves guilt and sin and trying to be a better person. But for this guy, who admits to never having asked forgiveness for anything in his life, why should he have to? After all, God isn't mad at him, and his money is proof of that.

It's absolutely bizarre when you think of the Biblical Jesus. This was a man who owned nothing more than the clothes on his back, who relied on strangers for shelter and food, and who in Luke 14:33 says, "Those of you who do not give up everything you have cannot be my disciples." To go from that to "You know what? If I like you, then you get a Mercedes" requires some serious mental gymnastics. But it explains why so many evangelicals were able to forgive things that would usually be negatives for their candidate, like his previous pro-choice stance and his three marriages (strangely, White is also on her third marriage). They believe God has shown Trump's favored position by blessing him with material wealth.

financesonline.com

"He owns that," moaned an actual rally-goer.

But it gets weirder. Not only do Word of Faith followers believe being wealthy equals being good, they also believe that they are literally God. Picture Donald Trump, then let that fact sink in. Does he make a lot more sense now? No matter how little religious background you have, you probably know that Christianity is kind of, sort of based around the whole "Jesus is the Son of God" thing. It's, like, their main deal. Jesus was God made flesh, who came down here and died for our sins, then got resurrected. That's Christianity in a nutshell. So how can White claim to be a Christian pastor when she says things like Jesus was "not the only begotten Son of God," just the "first fruit"?

But there's more. Since you are a little version of God yourself, anything you speak can become true. Just like how God spoke and made the Earth and Heaven and animals and genital warts for some reason, you can say that you want to be wealthy, and BAM! It will happen (as long as you deserve it, of course). The same goes with your health. If you feel sick, just speak that you want to be better and you will be, even if you still feel like crap. Sure, "doctors" and "science" might say you have cancer, but you said you are well, so now you are. As White put it on her TV show, "If you believe God, you can create anything in your life." Anything bad that is happening to you is your fault, because you are thinking negatively. Hmm, I wonder why this makes total sense to a guy who was completely unqualified to be president, but decided he wanted to be, and then won?