“I tore a picture of Super C out of Powder magazine and had it in my locker when I was a kid,” said Thomas Laakso, 44, who works for a snow-safety start-up called Avatech in Park City, Utah. He had been trying to ski the fabled couloir, or gully, for 10 years, but the conditions were never right for him. Just two days earlier, he’d tried and failed to reach the top. But he made it this day.

Himay Palmer, a dreadlocked bus driver from Telluride, Colo., also was among the five. “You just can’t plan for something like this,” he said.

For Kalen and me, these comments validated a plan we’d devised the previous Friday, booking plane tickets and a week at Hotel Portillo on a day’s notice.

In an age where climate change is making it harder to rely on previously consistent adventure destinations for anything from surfing to fly fishing, there’s a huge upside to hanging back, waiting for the perfect forecast and then enduring economy middle seats on a red-eye flight. No, it’s not budget-friendly to travel on short notice, but it feels better to spend too much on a great trip than get a bargain on terrible snow.

So the coup wasn’t that we’d lucked into prime conditions but that we’d ambushed the storm of the decade from 5,700 miles away.

40 Miles CHILE Pacific Ocean Portillo ARGENTINA Santiago PERU BRAZIL BOL. PARAGUAY CHILE Area of detail URUGUAY Atlantic Ocean ARGENTINA Pacific Ocean 1,000 Miles

Three weeks earlier, on July 18, Portillo had finally opened after its first winter storm. The resort sits along the International Highway at the border with Argentina, two hours north and east of Chile’s capital, Santiago.

“We had the suicide hotline on speed dial in June,” said Frank Coffey, an American who for two decades has been snow safety director at Portillo, about 110 miles northeast of Santiago. “We were at 4 percent of our normal precipitation in June. California was at 5 percent. It was the driest June in Chile in 47 years.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

From 2010 until March, the Pacific Ocean’s waters were cooler than average, what scientists call a La Niña pattern, which led to droughts and left slopes barren across the Western Hemisphere. An El Niño — warmer waters — was declared in spring, and now climate scientists at the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration say there’s a greater than 95 percent chance the El Niño, with its drenching rains, will continue through the winter.

The August storm wasn’t the first time the Portillo area has coped with large snowfalls brought on by the phenomenon. “My first year here was 1997,” Mr. Coffey said. “It was a strong El Niño year. My second week, it snowed four meters in five days, and the road was closed for nine days. We had a couple hundred Peruvian workers who got stuck in buses on the road heading to Argentina to work.” He recalled that Henry Purcell, the resort’s owner, put them up for $1 each a night. “The guests that were here were stuck for nine days,” he said.

The hotel’s operations manager, Michael Rogan, another American, said, “There have been times when people would fly in and out in helicopters when the road was closed. And there have been times that they’d ski in and out.

“The road would be opened to the bottom of the Juncalillo chairlift, and people would ride up the lift, and we’d have grooms at the top of the lift to grab their bags and walk them down to the hotel,” Mr. Rogan said. “People would ski out to the snow line where the taxis would be waiting. The best part is that when you’re snowed-in in Portillo, you’re snowed in.”

In early July, there had been no sign of significant snow. Then between July 10 and 14, the first El Niño storm arrived and pounded the Andes with six feet.

Around Aug. 1, an even bigger blob of moisture, equivalent to more than four feet of rainwater, showed up on the regional radars. It was off the coast of Chile, still a week away. Forecasts from MeteoChile, the local weather agency, predicted that the storm would be huge — and unlike many forecasts that change as the weather gets closer, this one continued to promise a significant snowfall.

“The flow became zonal, meaning from west to east,” Mr. Coffey said. “It was like a firehose pointed right at us, and suddenly we were in the money.”

Photo

On Aug. 6, in Salt Lake City, I noticed an outrageous snow forecast calling for 14 feet in the Portillo area. And I’d seen photos in my social media feeds from Chris Davenport — a professional skier who runs an annual trip to Portillo for well-heeled experts, called Superstars Ski Camp — that he’d taken during the first storm.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

So I booked a ticket to Santiago for that Saturday — 36 hours later — and told my editors at Outside magazine that I wouldn’t be at work the next week.

Kalen was canyoneering in Zion National Park but needed no prodding when she emerged. “I want to play...” was the full text of her note when I told her I was going. (Like many millennials, Kalen communicates primarily with her thumbs.)

When we arrived Aug. 9, the road had just reopened to local traffic. The historic yellow Hotel Portillo, which opened in 1949 along an old rail line, was taken over in 1961 by the New York hotelier Bob Purcell, who hired his nephew Henry, now 81, as the general manager. The resort, which is perched 30-odd switchbacks above the valley, offers several levels of service, including the hostel-like Inca Lodge, the dormitory-style Octagon Lodge, cozy chalets and four-star suites in the yellow hotel itself. But at its core, Portillo offers only one product: The all-inclusive ski week. Occupancy maxes out at 460. During our stay, there were 357 guests (which meant untracked snow all week).

“If you have people checking in and out every day, it takes away from the sharing and the exchange of getting to know people and hanging out in the mountains,” Mr. Rogan said.

Photo

Meals are served in the common dining room or cafeteria or at the mid-mountain Tio Bob’s restaurant. Each night until midnight, a different band — all-female ’90s cover acts seem popular — plays in the bar, where we saw a 12-year-old boy crowd surfing and the ski-film stars Wendy Fisher and Ingrid Backstrom dancing on tables. We spent one Pisco-and-Escudo-soaked evening at a bar called El Paseo, in honor of the ninth birthday of Radka, the St. Bernard usually found asleep in the hotel lobby. And Kalen learned some crude Chilean slang meaning roughly, “no way!” that became her catchphrase.

Mostly I kept marveling at how well everything seemed to work, despite there being so many different people from so many backgrounds, ages, abilities and alcohol tolerances steeping in the same giant hot tubs overlooking the Laguna del Inca, the nearby lake.

“The walls talk to you,” said Bill Johnston, a banking executive from Connecticut who was vacationing with his wife and four children. “They’re haunted with ski history.”

You don’t have to be an expert to ski Portillo, but it’s more fun if you are. Groomed beginner runs descend to the hotel from most of the elevated chairlifts, but the powderfields like Primavera and a hike up into an apron called Two-Hundred Turns are what get people worked into a feverish lather.

Photo

Just riding the surface lifts to them can be an adventure.

The most famous of the so-called va-et-vient (come-and-go) rope tows, specially designed by the French chairlift engineering company Poma to haul skiers straight up the avalanche chutes, is the Roca Jack. It features five frisbee-like seat discs attached to a steel bar, which is, in turn, attached to a cable that drags skiers up the mountain five at a time — and a little too fast. Wipeouts are common.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The real draw of the area, though, is the out-of-bounds terrain above the lifts, which you can reach with a guide — heli skiing is available as well — or on your own. (Slopes beyond the boundaries aren’t controlled with explosives, so skiers should have avalanche training and carry standard backcountry gear, including a locator beacon, a shovel, and a probe.)

Four narrow couloirs descend into the Lake Run, and there’s the crown jewel, the Super C. From where we stood on the vertigo-inducing gendarme, or pinnacle, that divides the ascent and descent routes, the hotel and the road’s switchbacks were visible thousands of feet below. Behind us, with a flag of wind-driven snow kicking off its 22,837-foot summit, was Aconcagua, the tallest mountain in the Western Hemisphere.

Himay and Thomas dropped in first, and, one by one, we each followed, descending into a kind of dream state of the perfect ski run that never ends. The jitters of dropping into such a steep couloir subsided. Fifteen minutes later, our group emerged onto the apron of the run where we made wide, fast, giant slalom turns that felt as effortless as surfing a glassy wave.

“It’s like somebody flipped the switch,” Mr. Coffey said of El Niño. “It’s probably what’s going to happen in California this winter, too.”

We’ll be ready when it does.