These days, the actress Gwyneth Paltrow, 43, is perhaps better known for her website, Goop.com, where New Age meets wellness meets urban bourgeoisie. Not content with, well, just content, she has been developing makeup products with Juice Beauty and has introduced her Goop skin-care line. Ms. Paltrow, who is also mom to Apple, 11, and Moses, 9, lives in Los Angeles. Here, she shares beauty, hair and life advice.

Skin Care

In general, I love serums and face oils and body oils. I’m a real oil kind of girl. There’s a myth that oil is not good for your skin. I don’t believe in that at all. So lately I’ve been using my Instant Facial — it has some gentle fruit acids in it, and you feel it go active because there’s a little tingle — and seeing great results. There are also some beads in it (obviously not the plastic microbeads), and it leaves me glow-y. I think you’re supposed to use it only three times a week, but I’ve been using it more. Then I’ll use the day or night cream, or our oil, and the eye cream.

Photo

Sometimes, I’ll use a clarifying mask. I like this blue one by May Lindstrom. We did a big story on clean, nontoxic S.P.F.s last summer, and there’s a great one by Drunk Elephant. I also like the ones by Coola and Honest. I only use mineral sunscreens, never the chemicals one. I don’t understand why anyone would put on carcinogens.

I also love Tammy Fender body oil. It has a lavender scent, and it’s smooth and really absorbs. I find oil on skin really helps the appearance. And Organic Pharmacy has a body oil I like. Sometimes I’ll just use the organic coconut oil in my kitchen on my legs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When I’m on the go, I use Ursa Major face wipes. Also, oil is really good for getting off eye makeup. You don’t want to use a harsh chemical.

Photo

Makeup

In the day, I generally don’t wear that much makeup. The culture in L.A.: You’re outside a lot, there’s hiking and swimming. It feels in a way that you’re more engaged with nature. I usually use a little bit of Tata Harper or RMS. They each have a little cream blush for lips and cheeks. Also Olio e Osso. It’s a beautiful olive oil balm with color in it, and I’ll stain my cheeks with that. Juice Beauty does a great nontoxic mascara and also these liquid lip glosses. It’s less and less hard to find nontoxic stuff. It’s kind of amazing how much selection is available.