Every year, Junebug Weddings showcases the stunning beauty of weddings across the globe with their Best of the Best Destination Photo Contest. Naturally, this year's edition of the annual competition is no different, as evident in the website's striking selection of around-the-world wedding photos.

Set in beautiful locations from Italy to Iceland, the winning photos feature breathtaking backdrops from an eclectic range of settings. Most photos take advantage of the destinations' natural sights, including beautiful beaches, majestic peaks, lush forests, and cascading waterfalls. Many showcase a more culturally-focused approach and capture the couples as they embrace the customs of their selected destinations. Still, some photographs simply feature the newlyweds having fun, whether they're jumping in a lake, lounging on a boat, or sliding down sand dunes. No matter the activity, setting, or pose, however, each photograph focuses on beauty—both of the destinations and of love.

After looking over all Best of the Best Destination Photo Contest entries, the Junebug Weddings judging panel picked 50 final images. So, what were they looking for when selecting their winners? “Obviously an image that can take our breath away or that is super-clever, but also something that’s perhaps sincere and emotional or less obvious at first glance,” one judge explains. “I think it’s the couple that really brings a photo and location to life, so imagery that can capture the couple’s connection as well as the mood or a characteristic of the location is what we hop[ed] to see.”

To view all 50 winning photos, check out the Junebug Weddings website.

Scroll down to see some of the winners from this year's Best of the Best Destination Photo Contest.

Junebug Weddings: Website | Facebook | Instagram | Twitter

h/t: [Design You Trust]

All images via Junebug Weddings.

Related Articles:

17 “Best of the Best” Wedding Photos Showcase Gorgeous Depictions of Love

Creative Trends in Wedding Photography

8 Most Breathtaking Weddings Held Around the World

Bride Takes Portraits in 19 Countries Wearing Wedding Dress