The selective borrowing cannot be a matter of simple naïveté on the part of American fans. The ugly incident in Marseille this summer was widely reported by the international media, and it was only the latest iteration of a lengthy and well-documented history of racism among European soccer supporters. In his 1990 book “Among the Thugs,” Bill Buford followed around a group of Manchester United supporters, completely immersing himself in their rituals. He drank with them and followed along as they incited mayhem, trying to discover the origins of their rowdiness. In one memorable scene, Buford takes an American friend to a match. When the supporters start grunting every time a black player touches the ball, the friend asks Buford about it. “It’s because a black player has the ball,” Buford explains. “They are making an ape sound because a black player has the ball.” Later in the book, when Buford attends a meeting of the National Front, a whites-only far-right party, in a bar in Southeast England, he is confronted by a barmaid who tells him that the bar had a proud record of never serving a “black or Paki.”

Photo

“I had not expected to hear racism expressed so explicitly by people working behind the bar of a pub — one owned by a brewery that was itself a public company,” Buford writes. “The fact was I hadn’t expected to hear racism expressed so explicitly by people I had only just met, regardless of where they worked.” “Among the Thugs” is an incisively told, gripping account of years spent with violent men, but Buford’s occasional surprise at the racism he encountered never quite sat right with me. I wondered about the herculean denial required to ignore what was plainly in front of him.

In Seattle, I saw glimpses of the same denial. A march of mostly white men and women through the streets of Seattle singing “put ’em up against a wall and shoot ’em” is absurd on its face (oddly enough, the lyrics of the original song by Cock Sparrer, an English band from the Oi! punk scene, derisively refer to “Americans in dark glasses”). But when these lyrics are sung in pubs in England or at National Front meetings like the one Buford attended, it also raises the question: Who, exactly, is “ ’em?”

Photo

There is another sort of elision happening, one that’s more disturbing than middle-class Americans’ cosplaying working-class traditions from the Continent. The spread of Europhilic American soccer culture excludes much of the population of American soccer fans, a healthy portion of whom are Latin American immigrants. When the Mexican national team toured the United States last year, it drew in an average of 59,000 fans, roughly two-thirds more than the crowds that watch the United States men’s national team. Broadcasts of Liga MX, the top club league in Mexico, regularly dwarf the ratings of Major League Soccer and the English Premier League. And yet, for the most part, M.L.S., the United States Soccer Federation and even the apparel and sports-drink companies that market to American soccer youth have drawn a line between whose attention is worth pursuing and whose is not.

There are now two separate American soccer cultures: one white, the other Latino. And while some of the Europhilia can be attributed to the relative newness of American soccer fandom (traditions, I suppose, have to start somewhere), it’s worth asking why soccer fans in a country with millions of immigrants from soccer-crazed countries in Central and South America would look so longingly toward Western Europe, or why the American media’s coverage of soccer culture, however scant, focuses on soccer bars in gentrified Brooklyn and fan organizations in majority-white cities like Portland, Ore., and Seattle.

This divide has limited the appeal and growth of the sport in the States. In the broadcast before the quarterfinal match in the Copa América soccer tournament between Mexico and Chile in June, Alexi Lalas, the former U.S.M.N.T. defender who turned shaggy red hair and a thick goatee into a personal branding moment in the 1994 World Cup, talked disapprovingly about the crowds of Mexican-American fans who had shown up at sites across the country to root for El Tri, Mexico’s men’s national team. Lalas explained that while his ancestry was Greek, if the United States played Greece in anything, there would be no question that his allegiance would lie with the red, white and blue. “There’s only one national team,” Lalas said.

If Alexi Lalas wants to know why so many Mexican-Americans choose not to root for the United States, he doesn’t need to look much farther than the crowds who gather in M.L.S. stadiums and bars and sing songs inspired by groups who shove black men off subway trains and travel to foreign cities to taunt Muslim immigrants. There is nothing wrong about borrowing what you love, but it should be called what it is — a dream of an ultimately monochromatic gathering in which thousands of white men can brawl (but safely and without guns!) in the streets and drunkenly sing Phil Collins melodies in pubs, lending a hooligan snarl to a white, suburban culture.