When John Sutherland’s grandfather drowned himself, he left behind boxes of ancient banknotes, a fractured, angry family, and the revelation that he had gone by three surnames during his lifetime. The mystery led back to the 19th century …

On 4 February 1958, the body of a 70-year-old man was found bobbing in the river Colne, below Middle Mill pond, in Colchester. He had been in the water for six days, by a frequented, paved path. Stones in his pocket (as my mother much later told me) meant my grandfather intended his body to stay gone for ever – but postmortem gas brought it back to the world he wanted to leave.

The death record was terse: “SALTER or KNOPP Kenneth Leonard Vernon of 12 West Street Colchester, who was last seen alive on 28 January 1958 and whose dead body was found 4 February 1958 … Effects £805 8s.”

There were a couple of superficial reasons why Kenneth Salter/Knopp should have committed something that, in his earlier Victorian days, was called the crime of “self-murder”. His wife, Daisy, had gone into hospital. It was not terminal – she would outlive him by eight years. But he was alone in the house. His last recorded words were, as he watched the traffic: “Everybody drives nowadays.” Not him.

After his death, the mystery about Salter/Knopp thickened. Although he had worked as a manual labourer for 40 years, he owned a couple of houses elsewhere in the country. Boxes stuffed with cash were found in his shed – much of it ancient notes. The cash and property were discreetly laundered. Daisy modernised her house and lived her last years comfortably off – comfort denied her for all her small life.

The reason Kenneth chose the death that he did was, I believe, to escape from what he was. He was born outside of marriage (probably) and he was Jewish (most probably).

I knew him closely for two years of my childhood. I was, from the age of 10 to 12, mad on fishing. He was formidably knowledgeable about the rivers. He could catch fish in a rain puddle. Two particular favourites, in our fishing expeditions, were the Stratford and Dedham mills. These old sites, in 1949, were virtually unchanged since Constable painted them.

However, we never fished around Middle Mill pond. A friend, he said, had drowned there. He said little. His equipment was 30 or more years old. As was his bicycle. Those Saturdays were among the happiest of my life.

Until relatively recently, Knopp was a name wholly unknown to me. My mother, the smartest of his children, dropped occasional remarks, in passing, that her father was Jewish. No details.

I couldn’t start to make sense of it until a friend (acknowledged below) did a “Who do you think you are?” for me.

Kenneth’s mother, Alice Knopp, was born in 1866 in Frating, Essex, a few miles from Colchester. Most Jewish communities clustered in London but a number gravitated to Essex. Alice went into domestic service aged 14. Her life thereafter is obscure.

The next recorded fact is Alice giving birth to Kenneth Vernon Leonard in 1887, in Hackney, east London. On the birth certificate, she put her name as Alice Wheatley (nee Knopp), although she was not, in fact, married. She gave the father’s name as Arthur Wheatley, carman (ie cart driver). My hunch is Arthur never existed. It was a legitimation ruse. For the next four years, Kenneth was “Wheatley”.

Four years later, this resourceful woman, whose contempt for official documentation was incorrigible, renamed herself Lillie Knopp, spinster (exit the invisible Wheatley), and married Frederick Salter, in Camberwell, south London. Salter was a soldier. He had joined the army after being convicted of mugging – better khaki than bars. He was 13 years older than Alice. But he had seen the world, smelled powder, and cut a manly figure. He had been stationed in Colchester about the time Kenneth was conceived. Kenneth Knopp/Wheatley now became Kenneth Salter – the name he used for the rest of his life. Frederick died five years later, in 1896.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest John Sutherland as a boy.

The widowed Lillie is recorded in 1901 living with her son (Frederick is now registered as his father) in Colchester. Colchester is a garrison town, and in 1903 she enticed George West, a sergeant in the Suffolk regiment, into marriage. She clearly had a love of men in uniform and they for her. There is a vitality about what little one knows about her that is warming.

Kenneth, her only child, was now 15. He became a trouser presser, a skilled business in Edwardian England. He was a virtuoso with his irons and spray. There were queues of Colcestrian dandies at his door at weekends. At 22, he married 17-year-old Daisy Agnes Hamilton. She was heavily pregnant. Witnesses were William Knopp, Kenneth’s uncle, and his mother Alice West.

Daisy was pretty, diminutive, and (that valued thing) “dainty”. She was also a good seamstress; capable of mending trousers and, when required, good with the irons (I saw her using them dashingly, heated on gas rings not the hob, as late as 1950). The couple lived in a handsome house (how did Kenneth buy it?) in Colchester, with a growing family.

Kenneth was 27 when war broke out. His army service, insofar as one can surmise, was brief, and ignominious. “Salter K” enlisted on 12 January 1917 and was discharged from the Royal Engineers on 19 July 1917. The reason given is “sickness”. It was the year England almost lost the war, and men were desperately needed. But not Private Salter. The sickness was, I suspect, mental. He did, however, have an injured, wholly whitened eye which – I assumed – was a war wound. He may have seen action and fallen apart.

Whatever, he came back a difficult man. His eldest daughter, Daisy, got pregnant and was shuffled off to Australia. His son, Arthur, on his death bed, in 2004, told me that Kenneth had beaten him savagely as a child and that he was convinced that he was not his father. He added that, after the war, Kenneth was drunken and brutal to his wife. Daisy’s brothers would come round and punch him into better behaviour.

Kenneth’s pressing skills were unwanted in the 20s, and he sank to being what his death certificate calls a “general labourer”. But mysteriously, he still had money enough to buy another nice terraced house. The wherewithal was money left by his mother, Alice, who may have got it from family connections in London. The dates of the notes found after his death indicate he began boxing up money in the late 30s (when, I guess, Alice died) and did not splash it around. Doing that would have meant drawing attention to himself. An “illegitimate” Jewish Knopp. Loneliness closed in. To establish his sole claim to Alice’s money, however, he had had to identify himself as Knopp – hence the surname oddly popping up on his death notice. It is feasible he was not Jewish, or half-Jewish. But I think my mother was right.

I see the self-chosen end of Kenneth Leonard Vernon Wheatley/Knopp/Salter as the last, conscious move in a long flight from the personal history embedded in those three surnames. Kenneth’s bleak funeral was attended only by two daughters. I was instructed to keep away. His wife chose not to go. She said she was glad the cold February sun had briefly shone: “He didn’t get much in his lifetime.” He had not left her any note, nor – apparently – thought of softening the impact of his death.

I think a lot of Kenneth’s last hours, before his lungs filled. The image has haunted me for weeks now. And, to escape that, I think of those other, happier mill ponds we fished in.

• The genealogical research was supplied by Susan Walker, to whom I am profoundly grateful

• In the UK, the Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 (calls are free). In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be found here..