Before you suggest there’s no way vegan biscuits can taste just as good if not BETTER than regular biscuits, everyone I’ve fed these to agree that these are in fact LEGIT, amazing, fluffy, buttery biscuits.

As in, serve them to your 80-year old grandmother who’s been making biscuits for centuries and she wouldn’t know the difference. As in, slap some gravy on it and you’d think you died and gone to heaven. As in, fluffy, buttery, savory, biscuit perfection. It’s true.

I have tried making vegan biscuits once before and they did not meet my ridiculously high biscuit standards. They lacked that quintessential buttery flavor and fluffy texture that I so deeply adore. So this time, I read every single tip out there to fail-proof my biscuit making. And I’m happy to report that IT WORKED.

You need just 1 bowl, 30 minutes, and these simple ingredients:

1. Unbleached all-purpose flour.

2. Non-dairy butter (such as Earth Balance).

3. Sea salt

4. Baking powder

5. Baking soda

6 Plain almond milk.

7. Lemon juice.

That’s it! And you’re well on your way to vegan biscuit perfection.

The commandments of biscuit making, as I’ve discovered, are:

1. Do not over-handle the dough.

2. Never use a rolling pin, fool.

3. Make sure yo’ butter is cold.

4. Baking powder and soda are a must for fluff.

5. Brush the tops with butter to achieve that crusty, buttery top.

6. Make a divot in the middle with your fingers to prevent them from rising in a “dome.”

7. A hot oven (450 degrees F / 232 C) is essential. Don’t ask questions.

8. Biscuits must touch while baking to help them rise properly.

I would include a # 9. but it’s simply to eat biscuits immediately. I shouldn’t have to tell you that. A BISCUIT FRESH OUT OF THE OVEN > A BISCUIT REHEATED 3 DAYS LATER. Duh.

These little guys are PERFECT. Fluffy, moist, buttery, savory, perfect with jam, perfect for breakfast, perfect with anything. Hence the reason I’ve dubbed them THE BEST DAMN VEGAN BISCUIT.

And yes, I totally ate that whole damn biscuit (and them some).

4.8 from 265 reviews The Best Damn Vegan Biscuits Print Friendly Version Prep time 10 mins Cook time 15 mins Total time 25 mins Fluffy, buttery vegan biscuits that require just 30 minutes, 7 ingredients, and 1 bowl! Perfect for breakfast as is or smothered with jam! Author: Minimalist Baker Recipe type: Breakfast, Brunch Cuisine: Vegan Serves: 7 Ingredients 1 cup (240 ml) unsweetened PLAIN almond milk

1 Tbsp (15 ml) fresh lemon juice

2 cups (272 g) unbleached all-purpose flour

1 Tbsp (7 g) baking powder

1/2 tsp baking soda

3/4 tsp sea salt

4 Tbsp (56 g) non-dairy, unsalted butter (I use Earth Balance) Instructions Preheat oven to 450 degrees F (232 C), and add lemon juice to almond milk to make "vegan buttermilk." Set aside. In a large mixing bowl, whisk together dry ingredients. Add cold butter and use fingers or a pastry cutter to combine the two until only small pieces remain and it looks like sand. Work quickly so the butter doesn’t get too warm. Make a well in the dry ingredients and, using a wooden spoon, stir gently while pouring in the almond milk mixture 1/4 cup at a time. You may not need all of it. Stir until just slightly combined – it will be sticky. Turn onto a lightly floured surface, dust the top with a bit of flour and then very gently turn the dough over on itself 5-6 times – hardly kneading. Form into a 1-inch thick disc, handling as little as possible. Use a 1-inch thick dough cutter or a similar-shape object with sharp edges (such as a cocktail shaker) and push straight down through the dough, then slightly twist. Repeat and place biscuits on a baking sheet in two rows, making sure they just touch – this will help them rise uniformly. Gently reform the dough and cut out one or two more biscuits – you should have 7-8. Next brush the tops with a bit more of melted non-dairy butter and gently press a small divot in the center using two fingers. This will also help them rise evenly, so the middle won’t form a dome. Bake for 10-15 minutes or until fluffy and slightly golden brown. Serve immediately. Let remaining biscuits cool completely before storing them in an airtight container or bag. Notes Adapted from the man, Alton Brown Nutrition Information Serving size: 1 biscuit (of 7) Calories: 170 Fat: 6g Saturated fat: 1.8g Carbohydrates: 25g Sugar: 3.4g Fiber: 1g Protein: 3.4g 3.5.3226