He is track and field's biggest dealmaker and ultimate sugar daddy.

John Capriotti, vice president of Nike's global athletics marketing, has likely dispensed more money to more runners, jumpers and throwers than anyone else in history. When the Olympic Trials got underway Friday in Eugene, he held court in a part of historic Hayward Field dubbed "Cap's Corner," in his honor.

His supporters credit him with nothing less than spurring a renaissance of American distance running that has made U.S. runners competitive again on the international scene.

But these are troubled times for Capriotti.

Track and field can be a murky world and Nike has more than once found itself allied with allegedly corrupt sports bureaucrats and doped athletes. What's more, Capriotti operates with a bare-knuckled aggression that has transformed him in the eyes of some critics from benefactor to bully.

* This spring, the company hauled promising U.S. 800-meter runner Boris Berian into court in an effort to prohibit him from moving to another brand. It was a public relations disaster that spawned an anti-Nike outcry.

* The cancer of performance enhancing drugs, which has already earned the Nike-affiliated Russian track and field team a ban from the Olympics, once again hit behind the berm in late June when prominent Nike-sponsored coach Jama Aden was arrested in Spain. Authorities reportedly found the banned substance erythropoietin, or EPO, in Aden's hotel room. The company said it has since "suspended its relationship" with Aden.

* Closer to home, the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency continues to investigate superstar coach Alberto Salazar, who runs one of Nike's elite teams and reports to Capriotti.

The allegations against Salazar, which he vehemently denies, played a role in a bizarre incident last June between Capriotti and a track coach.

Three eyewitnesses to the episode said they heard Capriotti in an expletive-laden tirade threaten to kill Danny Mackey, coach for a team sponsored by Brooks shoe brand. Capriotti, the witnesses said, accused Mackey of helping journalists who were looking into Salazar.

Capriotti declined multiple interview requests. Through his lawyer, he denied making any death threats and furnished an investigation that supported that view.

Some dismissed the exchange as typical Capriotti hyperbole. Either way, it plays into his legend as the sport's hot-tempered hard nose.

"I try to just laugh it off," said Mark Bossardet, sports marketing chief at Saucony. "But at some point, is it still a laughing matter? Is this the conduct of an executive of one of the most powerful brands in the world?"

Capriotti's rise to power provides a rare look into Nike's hyper-secret sports marketing operation and the central role it plays in keeping track and field alive. As other footwear brands compete for the same athletes, the competition can be as intense and personal as anything on the track.

Nike "will probably leave these Olympic Trials with 70 percent of the Olympic team," said Jesse Williams, a marketing executive with Brooks. "They can almost laugh at what the rest of us are trying to accomplish. But instead, it seems to enrage them."

Scandal at Kansas State

Capriotti is no stranger to controversy.

Twenty-three years ago, he abruptly quit as head track and cross country coach at Kansas State University to join Nike. Only afterwards did it emerge that Capriotti was embroiled in a scandal that would prompt an NCAA investigation and sanctions.

Capriotti admitted to his athletic director that he gave money -- he characterized it as a series of loans -- to athletes.

"I knew what I was doing the whole time, and I knew what I was doing was against NCAA rules," Capriotti told the Wichita Eagle, which broke the story. Citing "major violations," the NCAA later barred Kansas State's track and cross country programs from post-season competition and reduced the program's scholarships.

Fate and an important friend intervened, sending Capriotti's life in a new direction.

Steve Miller, the former Kansas State athletic director who had hired Capriotti, had by then joined Nike as its head of sport marketing. Miller and Capriotti went way back. "I coached Cap at Bloom High School in Chicago Heights, Illinois," Miller said.

The Kansas State controversy "gave me pause," Miller admits. But he believed in Capriotti. He said he discussed Capriotti's case with Nike co-founder Phil Knight and got clearance to hire him.

"Phil and I talked about it," Miller said. "He was the right guy. He (Capriotti) said the infractions were genuine and real. I don't think Cap ever tried to hide from it."

Suddenly, Capriotti found himself in a place where he paid athletes for a living and the NCAA had no jurisdiction. He thrived.

Sponsoring entire teams

As he climbed through the corporate ranks, Capriotti played a central role in tweaking Nike's strategy. The early 2000s were not good years for American distance running. Kenyans and Ethiopians dominated.

In hopes of changing the situation, Nike began funding elite teams staffed by top coaches. It poured millions into the Oregon Track Club in Eugene and the Bowerman Track Club and the Nike Oregon Project, both in Portland.

The hope was that the top post-collegiate runners, if provided structure, top coaching and other help, could concentrate solely on their sport and get better. Dozens of the nation's best runners converged on Oregon to become part of Nike's teams.

Unlike other professional athletes, who get the bulk of their compensation from their team or league, track and field athletes are almost entirely reliant on endorsement contracts. By the standards of professional sports, it's tiny money for all but the best. Even elite distance runners just coming out of college and yet to prove themselves on the world stage generally get middle-class money of $50,000 to $100,000 a year.

The companies offer big bonuses for big victories and national or world records. Some, like Nike, also reserve the right to cut compensation if an athlete fails to meet certain benchmarks.

And U.S. distance running has rebounded. The game-changing moment came in 2012 when Nike athlete Galen Rupp won the silver medal in the 10,000 meters at the London Olympics.

There are business reasons to justify the strategy. It builds brand awareness and offers valuable product feedback. But for a company founded and run by former track and field competitors, it's more than business. The company said in a written statement it sponsors "thousands" of athletes because "running is at the heart of Nike and we're passionate about inspiring future generations of athletes and growing the sport."

Other brands like New Balance, Brooks and Hoka One One have since followed suit and backed their own elite teams.

Bar brawl or something more?

Back in 2006, before the team system had paid big dividends, Capriotti's team made headlines for darker reasons.

In the early-morning hours of June 22, Llewellyn Starks, one of Capriotti's lieutenants at Nike, got into a fight with a Eugene masseuse named Chris Whetstine while both were in Indianapolis for the U.S. National Championships. It was a one-sided affair.

Whetstine, who'd been brought to Indianapolis by Nike to treat its athletes, suffered a broken nose, a dislocated left thumb, a sprained ankle, a concussion and other head injuries, according to an Indianapolis Police Department report.

A video camera outside the Westin Hotel caught the combat. "It was clear that the Nike person was the aggressor," said Skye Griffin, the Indianapolis Police Department detective assigned to the case. "It was an assault, not a fight. I don't even know that the massage guy threw a punch."

What at first glance seemed a routine bar brawl then veered off in an unexpected direction. Days after the fight, top U.S. sprinter Justin Gatlin announced that he'd flunked a drug test. Gatlin's agent publicly accused Whetstine of sabotaging Gatlin with testosterone-laced massage cream.

Whetstine then and now denies the allegations and the agent's claims have been discredited.

But was there a connection between the supposed sabotage and the fight? Starks specialized in signing sprinters and jumpers. Gatlin was one of Nike's most prized sprinters at the time.

Griffin never got the opportunity to ask Starks directly. He didn't return her phone calls, she said.

Det. Phil Beaver, who picked up the case after Griffin left the department, said he never figured it out.

To the dismay of the detectives, Marion County Prosecutor Carl Brizzi dropped the case. "There's a long and distinguished list of people who were surprised that charges were not filed," Beaver said.

Nike declined comment other than to say Capriotti was not present at the fight. Starks, who did not respond to requests for comment, still works for Capriotti and Nike.

After Gatlin served his four-year ban and returned to competition, Nike again signed him to a sponsorship deal.

Confrontation at Hayward

Will Leer sat in the athletes' tent at Hayward alone and disconsolate.

It was June 25, 2015, at the U.S. National Championships. The long-time Nike distance runner had run poorly in an early round of the 1,500 meters and wouldn't be advancing to the finals.

It took a moment to register with Leer that the two men next to him were in an increasingly heated argument. He realized with a start that the aggressor in the confrontation was Capriotti, effectively his boss.

"Cap charges in and starts unloading on (track coach Danny) Mackey," Leer said. "It was this macho tirade. He was poking Danny in the chest."

Dorian Ulrey, a runner for the Brooks Beasts, Mackey's team, was in the middle of it all. He was debriefing with Mackey about the just-concluded race when, he said, "Capriotti came over and the show began."

Mackey along with Ulrey, Leer and a third eyewitness who declined to be named, gave detailed accounts to The Oregonian/OregonLive of what happened that night. All four said Capriotti repeatedly threatened Mackey's life, even though others dispute that.

According to Mackey's account to university police, Capriotti, flanked by three of his Nike's sports-marketing lieutenants, leaned in close, his nose practically touching Mackey's cheek. "You know what you [expletive] did," Capriotti said, based on what Mackey told police. "I'm going to [expletive] kill you."

"Cap just came off the hinges," Ulrey said. "It's not what you'd expect from an adult. I think people were pretty shocked."

The three witnesses said Capriotti accused Mackey of speaking badly about Nike to a young runner both sides were recruiting. Leer and Ulrey also said Capriotti accused Mackey of helping journalists looking into allegations against Salazar.

Mackey declined to press charges and the police never interviewed Capriotti or took further action.

Steve English, a Portland lawyer who counts Capriotti as a client, said Mackey's account is false. English and another partner at the Perkins Coie firm investigated the incident at Capriotti's request. They interviewed five witnesses, all of whom said that that while there was an angry conversation, Capriotti neither poked Mackey nor threatened his life.

Four of the five witnesses were Nike employees who report to Capriotti.

Taken in isolation, the incident might have been forgotten. But it helped feed the increasingly apparent resentment against Nike among some track and field insiders. Leer said he was so disgusted with the display that he immediately asked his agent to get him out of his Nike contract.

Anti-doping investigators dig in

Just a year into his dream job as assistant coach at the Nike Oregon Project, Steve Magness was deeply unhappy. "I saw things that bothered me," he said. He felt that Salazar pushed the use of certain prescription drugs in hopes their side effects would boost his athletes' performance, concerns that are now under investigation.

Magness decided to go to Salazar's boss, Capriotti. He said he tried multiple times to schedule a meeting and informed Capriotti what he wanted to discuss. Capriotti either didn't respond or simply refused, he said.

"I was essentially rebuffed and not responded to, which was incredibly frustrating," Magness said. "I don't think he wanted to know."

But the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency does want to know. A year after English broadcaster BBC and investigative-journalism website ProPublica ran stories containing allegations against Salazar (both publications quoted Magness), the agency continues to dig.

On June 23 of this year, as part of probe, the anti-doping agency filed a motion in a Texas court attempting to compel a local doctor to sit for a deposition. According to the New York Times, which broke the story, the subject of the motion is Dr. Jeffrey Brown, known in the track world for diagnosing hypothyroidism in distance runners. He has treated many world-class runners, including elite Nike athletes.

Any company that signs the number of athletes, national federations and coaches that Nike does is likely going to run into a doping issue. Aden is the latest case in point. But the allegations against Salazar hit much closer to home. This is a program funded, managed and staffed by Nike insiders.

Salazar has issued a point-by-point denial of the allegations against him. He told the Times that "the Oregon Project will never permit doping. I believe in a clean sport and a methodical, dedicated approach to training."

Officials at the anti-doping agency declined to comment.

Capriotti, through a spokesman, denied that he refused to meet with Magness or anyone else. Nike said the company "believes in clean sport and does not tolerate the use of performance-enhancing drugs or methods."

Unrivaled resources

Now 60, Capriotti has been at Nike for 23 years. He's a corporate vice president and is living the gracious West Hills life that may have seemed unlikely after the Kansas State scandal. When his job allows, he retreats to a country house he owns in the Tuscan hills of central Italy.

With Nike sales now surpassing $32 billion a year -- running shoe sales alone topped $5 billion -- Capriotti's professional resources are unrivaled, as is his network of contacts. Last April, his old coach and mentor Steve Miller was elected chairman of the U.S.A. Track and Field, the federation overseeing the sport.

Capriotti's small department got another dose of unwanted publicity this spring when the company sued Berian, the 800-meter runner, trying to prevent him from moving to a competing brand.

Berian supporters rallied at #freeboris on Twitter and took turns excoriating Nike. When Nike finally dropped the suit, the respected Let'srun.com track and field website ran the headline: "David 1, Goliath 0."

Berian's Cinderella story continued at this week's Olympic Trials. He finished second in the 800 final Monday, qualifying him for the Olympic team. Yet, Capriotti must have relished the race. Berian, now running for New Balance, appeared headed for victory until Clayton Murphy overtook him with just steps to the finish line.

Murphy left the University of Akron just weeks ago to run professionally. He signed with Nike.

-- Jeff Manning

503-294-7606, jmanning@oregonian.com