Photo

NATAL, Brazil — The list of improvements that the United States men’s soccer team needs to make is considerable. Coach Jurgen Klinsmann would like to see a more consistent back line, better touch from his midfielders and plenty more production from the attackers.

Yet as Klinsmann and his players begin their World Cup here Monday against Ghana, trickier questions of soccer acumen have come into focus:

Are the Americans bad at playacting? And if so, should they try to get better?

The first part seems easy enough. For better or worse, gamesmanship and embellishment — or, depending on your sensibilities, cheating — are part of high-level soccer. Players exaggerate contact. They amplify the mundane. They turn niggling knocks into something closer to grim death.

Photo

They do all this to force the referee to make decisions, with the hope that if he is confronted by imagined bloodshed often enough, he will ultimately determine he has seen some. Applying this sort of pressure on the official is a skill that, by their own admission, United States players generally perform poorly, if they perform it at all.

Graham Zusi, an American midfielder, said diving, also known as flopping, “is something I’ve never really incorporated into my game, and I don’t plan on it.” Tab Ramos, one of Klinsmann’s World Cup assistants and a player for the national team from 1988 to 2000, said he frequently saw Americans struggle to pull off the seemingly requisite soccer shenanigans. A Uruguayan-born American who played in Europe and the United States, Ramos is attuned to the art.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Absolutely that’s something we don’t do the way other teams do,” Ramos said. “I don’t know if you call it a problem or a weakness, but it’s clear that the American nature is to try and make everything fair, to try and be fair to the game. That’s just how Americans are.”

It is undeniable that this tendency matters, particularly at the World Cup, where a single decision can be so meaningful. Little more than an hour into the opening game of this tournament, Frederico Chaves Guedes, a Brazilian forward known as Fred, went to control the ball near the top of the penalty area. He felt a Croatian defender’s hand on his shoulder. He then flung himself to the ground as if yanked back by a puppeteer’s string, throwing his arms into the air and screaming hysterically.