We spent 16 nights in 10 Airbnb homes in seven states. The learning curve was sometimes steep enough to make the family, especially my wife, question the whole plan. But without breaking our budget, we had more space than motel or hotel rooms could offer, in neighborhoods that the chains didn’t reach and that we would not otherwise have seen. (We spent as little as $78 a night and as much as $185, for an average of $105.)

In Atlanta, we stayed along the narrow streets of Cabbagetown, a funky neighborhood once home to a mill and its workers. In Montgomery, Ala., our charming house in the Old Cloverdale neighborhood was much more relaxing after a day of sightseeing than being cooped up in a hotel room.

New Orleans was not as successful. We had booked four nights in what was billed as the “Hippie Bus,” parked in the driveway by a woman in the Bywater neighborhood who went by the name Otter. From the comfort of our Brooklyn home, this sounded like a great adventure to my boys. In reality, the bus felt musty and cramped. My wife, Sharon, slept on a mattress in the bus aisle. One night was plenty. In the morning, we searched for other options until Otter generously offered us a huge room with high ceilings and king-size beds in her house.

Otter was extremely accommodating but never more than a ghostly presence. We communicated via text and barely saw her. Many hosts were rarely around or completely absent. In Montgomery, our host Rick Duque was leaving for his own Airbnb vacation. Our final night was in a cabin near Lyndhurst, Va., built in 1863 by a Confederate soldier who then died at Chancellorsville. Though quaint, it was not a real Airbnb experience because it was one of many area cabins the owner rented.

By contrast, just before this trip, my wife and I had stayed in Airbnb homes while transporting our sons to and from camp. Both hosts were warm and gregarious — one even made us a picnic dinner and allowed us to use her kayaks in a nearby lake.

On our family trip, the boys were happy to escape chatting with grown-ups at every stop, but hosts who took that job title to heart made the visits more intimate and memorable even for them. In San Antonio, we spent two nights in an Airstream parked in Sara Santagata and Zach Walter’s driveway. (Yes, I was too quick to indulge my boys’ enthusiasm for such accommodations, but the Airstream was more spacious than the Hippie Bus.)

Sara and Zach gave us a tour of their beautiful Craftsman home; recommended a fantastic restaurant, the Arcade, at a less touristy part of the famous River Walk; and patiently let us check out late when we went to the Alamo and, ironically, I couldn’t remember where I had parked our car.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One of the many Airbnb lessons I learned on this trip: Splurge for just a little extra space, and everyone will be so much happier (or at least less cranky). Driving from Waco through Dallas to Hot Springs, Ark., we made a last-minute booking at a home in tiny Washington, Ark. Having couches and comfy chairs was heavenly after all that driving together.

But using Airbnb, especially when traveling with a family, requires carefully reading the host’s descriptions as well as guests’ comments. Extra fees for more than two guests can be a budget-breaker for families. Guest comments about partying all night with the host and his buddies indicate it might not be the ideal family stop.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Unfortunately, not every description is accurate. The Cabbagetown listing provided fair warning, saying the 600-square-foot apartment was ideal for two people. It had sleeping accommodations for four with a pullout sofa, but the owner cautioned, “Please understand that if you choose this option, it is a BUDGET option.”

By contrast, the host at our spacious and luxurious guesthouse in Waco oversold her sleeping arrangements. Arriving late after watching bats fly out from underneath Austin’s Congress Avenue Bridge, we searched the closets until we found the air mattress. It was supposed fit two. It did not. I landed on the couch (Sharon had suffered enough on the Hippie Bus).

No place highlighted the potential pitfalls better than Memphis. The city was memorable — Graceland, Sun Studios, the Stax Museum, Beale Street, the National Civil Rights Museum at the Lorraine Motel — yet lodging proved an endless headache.

The seemingly wide array of choices narrowed quickly. Like a modern Goldilocks, I found this house too small, that one too high-priced. Finding one that was just right? Not so simple. “Southern Hospitality With a Twist” got my attention until I discovered that the twist was nudism. We prefer our hosts clothed.

I found a place, but the hosts canceled just weeks before our trip, citing a new job in San Francisco. Hotels don’t do that.

I read about a house “just four miles from Memphis and all Beale Street has to offer.” Google Maps showed that the house was four miles from the Memphis border but a half-hour from Beale Street.

One lister renting apartments in historic downtown buildings didn’t respond for 10 days; by then I had found an affordable place in the Cooper-Young neighborhood.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dan Augustine was a welcoming host and a good conversationalist. However, the setup differed from the listing. Dan is divorced, and the bed belonging to his daughter when she visits was suddenly off limits, leaving Lucas, my 14-year-old, in a too-small bunk bed. Worse, Dan was dogsitting. Lucas has allergies, and by morning he had a tight chest and difficulty breathing. A second night was out.

Fortunately, the owner of those (pricier) downtown apartments responded immediately, and we ended up within walking distance of Beale Street, ideal for a night of live music.

Every road trip reaches that point when you just want to be home already. After Memphis, we had one day in Nashville and then 900 miles of driving over two days to Brooklyn. Our “cozy,” budget-conscious spot in Nashville seemed unbearable, especially with the 1863 cabin on the last night. Fortunately, a flexible cancellation policy allowed us to get a full refund, and we shelled out a little bit extra for the guesthouse at Nottingham Hill Farm, 40 miles east of Nashville.

Rick Snowden, a colorful character and inveterate storyteller, greeted us at 10:30 that night, and the next morning he regaled us with tales about his many marriages (“I’m one behind Elizabeth Taylor”); befriending Gov. Nelson A. Rockefeller of New York while still a teen; and his many collections, including political buttons and Kentucky Derby souvenir glasses, all of which he showed off. (He discreetly described himself as a former nightclub owner, but an article on the wall revealed that they were strip clubs.)

Caleb and Lucas reveled in having their own floor, down a spiral staircase, with a Skee-Ball game and a pool table that was in play well past midnight. In the morning, we played basketball on Rick’s outdoor court. We could have relaxed in the swimming pool, too, but when Rick saw Caleb drooling over his car collection, he took him for that memorable ride in his Ford convertible, letting Caleb drive when they returned to Rick’s property.

Not every Airbnb experience turns out quite like that, of course. But no motel has ever offered such memorable amenities.