DOES THE SURGERY SAVE MONEY ON OTHER HEALTH CARE COSTS IN THE END?

Not necessarily, two large studies found. One, comparing nearly 30,000 Blue Cross Blue Shield members who had the surgery with a similar group who did not have it, found no cost savings in the first five years. The other, a study of veterans, also found that the operation did not save money, at least in the first few years.

BUT WHY WOULDN’T MEDICAL COSTS BE LOWER AFTER SURGERY?

Patients often had expensive procedures that they had been ineligible for before the surgery, like hip or knee replacements or kidney transplants, and many had plastic surgery to remove huge flaps of loose skin, an operation that can cost as much as bariatric surgery. Some women who had had trouble becoming pregnant before the surgery succeeded afterward.

Surgery patients used fewer medications after the operation, but the drugs that obese people take tend to be inexpensive generics to treat conditions like high blood pressure, high cholesterol levels and diabetes.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

HOW WERE THE OPERATIONS DISCOVERED?

The two most popular treatments were discovered by accident. The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass was intended as a cure for stomach ulcers. It involved cutting out most of the stomach, leaving just a small pouch, and connecting part of the small intestine to the tiny stomach that remained. In 1966, when Dr. Edward Mason of the University of Iowa tried it on a very heavy woman, she lost weight. He began offering the procedure to very fat people for weight loss, but it did not catch on until the late 1990s, when surgeons discovered how to do it laparoscopically, making it much safer.

The other operation, the sleeve gastrectomy, was discovered in 2000 when Dr. Michel Gagner, a surgeon who was then at Mount Sinai in New York, was operating on an extremely obese woman. Suddenly, the anesthesiologist called out to him to stop. Immediately. The woman was not getting enough oxygen. Dr. Gagner had only begun the surgery and all he had accomplished was to cut off most of the patient’s stomach, leaving a pouch. He thought the operation was a failure, but to his surprise, the woman lost a lot of weight.

WHAT HAPPENS TO SOME OF THE HEALTH CONDITIONS RELATED TO OBESITY AFTER BARIATRIC SURGERY?

Sleep apnea often vanishes and, with the bypass operation, so does acid reflux. Blood pressure falls. Diabetes often goes away even before much weight is lost — sometimes before patients leave the hospital. Weight loss can also relieve diabetes, but it turns out that the surgery’s effect is different, and only partly understood. Part of it is because of a marked increase in a hormone, GLP-1, after surgery. The hormone makes the pancreas release more insulin and also makes people — and animals — feel satiated. Patients also become more sensitive to the insulin they make.

But researchers suspect that other changes from surgery contribute to the alleviation of diabetes. They are still trying to figure them out.