A while back, I went to San Francisco to report a piece about some protests happening in town. The conflict, as narrated in the local papers, puzzled me. Although it supposedly centered on private buses for tech workers, the concerns had a more broadly political air. This was not surprising—San Francisco is the capital of broad politics—but I couldn’t see where ideological disputes actually arose. Protesters painted themselves as grass-roots liberals, speaking up for poor, creative, or countercultural outsiders. The techies involved also considered themselves grass-roots liberals, creating apps to fight the Man, effect philanthropic efficacy, and support the same outsiders. I stayed in the Bay Area awhile, interviewed forty or fifty people, watched protests, attended tech events and community meetings, and flew to New York City to tear out my hair. Writing long articles always involves muscle strain, but the parturition of this piece (which ran in the summer of 2014 ) was excruciating, because the material seemed to lack any conceptual edges. The ferment had been billed in the press as a “culture war.” And yet the two sides of the conflict—in terms of beliefs, ideological lineage, and language—were almost entirely the same. I worked over my notebooks like a Rubik’s cube for days and weeks, trying to understand where the lines of dispute and interest arose. When some clarity came, I found myself looking past these post-hippie preoccupations. Today that article is nearer my heart than most, because of what it forced me to confront: a new relationship among language, identity, and public process, and a way that they were nullifying one another across public life. In that piece and some previous Bay Area reporting , I pointed out a generational trend toward privatization in both a literal and an abstract sense. We had entered an era of the mainstream bespoke, it seemed to me: a time when technology helped individualize personal experience. It had become normal to scroll through an algorithmically curated feed while listening to our own music in a busy café. Social media made public self-definition instant and easy: I am X; I am Y. Personal meaning thrived. During the spring when I reported in San Francisco, Burger King switched its slogan from “Have it your way” to “Be your way”—a broadening from condiment preference to ontology which, as the chain told it, reflected a turn toward “self-expression” and a belief that “it’s our differences that make us individuals instead of robots.” No freethinker could disagree. I began to wonder, though, about the effects of this individualization on public language and, as a result, political life. The trouble in San Francisco, I realized, wasn’t that the warring tribes followed different doctrines. It was that they followed the same doctrine, abstractly stated, but had less and less of a way to gather and work from the abstract into the specific. Everyone was operating as a good San Francisco liberal, struggling against the establishment, outside the system, for the people. Ironically, this meant there was less and less system left, no common terms by which the whole community could move ahead. Public language, as I put it in the piece, was coming unmoored from public process. I wondered what the future would bring if the rhetoric of our best ideals kept moving in this direction—if people of a single political identity couldn’t agree on the real sense of the words that, they were certain, gave voice to their values.

Fast-forward a couple of years. It’s spring again, and I’m in Oberlin, Ohio, trying to report on another conflict I’ve been reading about but do not understand. A swell of activism has risen at college campuses across the country, and the students involved (liberal, diverse, sophisticated) are at odds with many of their teachers (liberal, diverse, sophisticated). Tempers are high; language is strong. What unnerves spectators is that values on both sides purport to be the same. Professors champion varied viewpoints, non-oppressive learning environments, and protected self-expression. Protesting activists want varied viewpoints, non-oppressive learning environments, and protected self-expression. Members of both groups believe that they’re on the progressive flank of academe. The compass rose that helped me understand the Bay Area now fits the national map. In writing about Oberlin, I tried to show that at least two camps are thinking rigorously and systemically about campus problems. The place where those camps meet, though—where translation happens, where theory gets hammered out into systemic action, where language matters most—is desolate, because the language of common values has lost common meaning. It doesn’t help that some students disengage from people who aren’t on their wavelengths. But the reason for that disengagement, some tell me, is that public conversation has begun to seem performative, incapable of producing results. My work elsewhere has made me think that this isn’t just an Oberlin, or liberal, thing. Self-defining language has grown easy to pass around but hard to translate into social results. “Diversity,” we know, is crucial. Yet the word means disparate things to a housing activist, a tech executive, and an admissions dean, and they end up talking past one another. Most of us agree, admirably, that we are feminists, like Beyoncé, but we struggle to have Beyoncé-sized conversations on the subject, because our ideas of what, specifically, that declaration means are often irreconcilable—and the public road to sorting it out is rocky, full of jagged disputes and tricky questions to be smoothed out. Many of us quietly give up: our self-description becomes our identity, and our community is the people who appear to understand our language, more or less, the way we do. When we communicate across society, it’s at the level of rhetorical belief—“taking a stand”—more than in detail. Privacy is something we support. We should fight Big Money. Black lives really do matter, a lot. It can be hard to find one another amid such abstracted ideals, but at least we know that, wherever we are, we’re working under the same stars.

Another leap in time. It’s summer now—the present. Media people are dizzy from the way that Donald Trump is using language. On August 9th, he famously insists that President Obama is “the founder of ISIS .” (Eh?) On August 24th, he dismisses Hillary Clinton as “a bigot” by virtue of having ineffectual policies. The Trump campaign, since its inception, has traded in counterfactual hyperbole, praeteritio (“a lot of people say . . . I won’t say”), and dubious innuendo. But using words as if they have no definition marks a shift. Trump does not demur when it’s suggested that abstract nouns such as “bigot” and “founder” have meanings he’s transgressed. (“He’s their Most Valuable Player,” Trump said , of Obama, by way of clarification, three days after his ISIS remarks. “He was the founder.”) Oddly, though, the outlandish words seem not to obscure his message. When he makes his ISIS -founder remark, there are immediate cheers. Those people catch the specific, politically valenced meaning of the Trumponym “founder,” even if it baffles all the rest of us. This way of dealing with the language has intensified. When newscasters quote Trump’s statements back to his representatives, they reply , “That’s not what Mr. Trump is saying”; his words aren’t held to convey a fixed message. This obscurity comes to a head when Trump experiences his self-described “softening” on immigration, only to have his surrogates insist that there has been no change. “He hasn’t changed his position on immigration,” Katrina Pierson, a spokesperson, says on CNN. “He’s changed the words that he is saying.” To know what Trump means, despite the words that he is saying, you have to understand—or think you understand—the message before he opens his mouth. That way of interpreting language is unassailable because it allows no persuasion, only self-revelation: the words don’t convey information but, like candles and jasmine perfume, serve as aesthetic trappings, prompts that may lead listeners to locate certain passionate moods in themselves. That not everybody across a population finds candles and jasmine perfume romantic—that some people prefer the kinetics of the disco, say—becomes an unsolvable problem. One solution is to defer to the beliefs of people of a single mind. Within a population, this is only practical if no two groups’ beliefs are ever at odds. In a climate where common language is not held accountable to common meaning, “taking a stand” becomes a mostly theatrical exercise. Trump, the candidate, is all about “taking a stand,” announcing values and setting trajectories. That little seems to be backed by fixed meaning or process isn’t, as some observers claim, a quirk of his campaign. Believing oneself to stand for inexpressible values of American greatness is not actually very different from believing oneself to stand for inexpressible values of American counterculture, or populism, or freedom. Trumpism is successful because it leverages a disconnect among language, meaning, and process that’s deep-set in our national life. He can say anything these days—because the rest of us can, too.