Consideration for the crown of Lionfish King or Queen requires the removal of at least 50 lionfish, with photographic evidence. After 50, participants must drop off tails in sandwich bags at statewide checkpoints.

Video

“Lionfish are best taken by spear and hand-held nets. They are rarely taken successfully on hook and line,” the commission advises. This means diving skills are essential to winning the contest.

While a government-endorsed killing competition may rub some the wrong way, there’s consensus that it’s a choice between lionfish and reefs.

Right now, “nothing keeps the population in check other than divers spearing them,” said Amanda Nalley, a spokeswoman for the fish and wildlife commission, which estimates that millions of lionfish — perhaps billions — lurk in nonnative waters.

She says people have tried to feed lionfish to sharks, hoping the fish will become part of the shark’s regular diet. But not only is this illegal in state waters (sharks associating food with divers is dangerous), there is also no indication that it works. Another option is to introduce a disease or parasite that could control lionfish numbers — but it is not easy to find one that would affect only lionfish, she said.

In the wild, lionfish live about 10 years and spawn every few days, releasing some 30,000 eggs each time. In the Caribbean, a single female lionfish can spawn more than two million eggs a year, according to the Ocean Support Foundation.

In its new home, the species has little competition and few natural predators, diseases or parasites. It also has a dangerous appetite — feasting on grazers that keep algae from growing on coral reefs and at least 50 ecologically and economically important species.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Science Times Newsletter Every week, we’ll bring you stories that capture the wonders of the human body, nature and the cosmos. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“All of the natural balance that can take thousands of years to vet itself out is missing,” Lad Akins, a biologist who has been studying the invasion with a conservation group called REEF, said in an email.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the Bahamas, where the lionfish invasion has been particularly heavy, Mr. Akins and Stephanie Green, an ecologist at Oregon State University, found that lionfish reduced the native prey fish and population sizes on reefs by 65 percent in just two years.

And other researchers showed lionfish decreased young fish establishing themselves on reefs by almost 80 percent in only five weeks.

Dr. Green wants to know if lionfish can be managed without killing them all, because that’s hard to accomplish, Mr. Akins said. Dr. Green is searching for a threshold for how many lionfish can live on a reef without causing damage.

In the meantime, contest participants who remove 50 invaders will receive a commemorative coin and a T-shirt, among other incentives.

The newly minted king or queen will receive a lifetime saltwater fishing license, a photograph on the cover of next year’s Saltwater Regulations publication, and glory.

Even if you don’t dive, you can still eat. Sustainable seafood restaurants now serve invasive species like lionfish not just in Florida, but across the country. Diners are encouraged to order the flaky white fish instead of harder-to-come-by varieties like sea bass and grouper.