If you didn't click that, it's Obama telling his daughters that they have earned the new puppy that is coming with them to the White House. That is cute as fuck right there. And like everything politicians do, it was totally calculated to make him look good.

Presidents basically have to have pets to make them seem more human and less like cyborgs that run on money and the power of the Constitution. What kind of pets they have and how they treat them are huge. We've told you before about some of the weirder choices, but in general, presidents need to have a dog. It was considered odd when the Clinton's entered the White House with only their cat, Socks. When they got a Labrador, Buddy, in 1997, many people saw him as nothing more than a political prop, especially as Buddy appeared only a month before the Lewinsky scandal broke.

wikipedia.org

Just try thinking about where he put his dick now.

In the past, presidential dogs have been the cause of scandal themselves. FDR had a Scottie named Fala that he brought with him everywhere and was a national celebrity. But Congress threatened to investigate Roosevelt after a rumor started that he had sent a destroyer to pick up the dog after it was left behind in the Aleutian Islands (it hadn't been). When Lyndon Johnson picked up one of his beagles, Him, by the ears to pose for a photo, the country went apeshit, to the point where he had to officially apologize.

historydaily.org

It took ages to give out all those belly rubs.

And in 1952, when Richard Nixon, then the Republican candidate for vice president, was caught taking money and gifts he wasn't supposed to, he made a half-hour televised speech defending himself. What was the only thing people remembered from that speech? That Nixon said he refused to give back a dog he had been given, which his children had already named Checkers. It went down in history as the "Checkers Speech," and it was maybe the one time Nixon came off kind of likable and not a bloated sack of lies.