The End is a series about end-of-life issues.

Before I was an intern standing in the middle of the night over a pale, motionless woman about to certify her death, I had a very different vision of what a person’s final moment would be like. Like many young people, my exposure to death was confined to stories others had told me or depictions of deaths on television. I didn’t see the true face of death until I was the one filling out the death certificate.

These days only about one in five people dies at home. Most die in hospitals or nursing homes. A unique and telling set of rituals has grown to be associated with death and dying in the hospital.

In hospitals, death has many faces depending on how aggressively the patient is being treated. For patients who desire a full-court press to the very end, their last moments usually include a physician like me performing CPR with the base of his palms, elbows locked. This can be a gruesome sight: once I performed CPR on a patient who was getting dialysis through a tube in his abdomen. Every time I compressed his chest, a jet of fluid from his belly would spray out. Very soon, my entire shirt was covered with the patient’s abdominal fluid, and the floor was so slippery I feared losing my balance and falling face first. This macabre theater is usually continued until the supervising physician decides to call it off. Everyone then goes back to their respective jobs, waiting for the overhead announcement of the code blue to sound again.

Increasingly though, when death is imminent and more treatment futile, many patients and their family members seek a different end. One of my patients with incurable liver cancer put it best, despite speaking minimal English: “No pain, no cry, just peace.”

Photo

If a family is around a patient who is close to dying, hospitals will frequently have a cart of coffee and cookies brought in. I once picked up one of those cookies, and a nurse immediately called out, “You shouldn’t eat that.”

“Why not?”

“It’s a death cookie,” she told me. “It’s bad luck to have one.”

Another telltale sign that death is looming is the television channel that the nurses often turn on in the patient’s room. A popular one is the C.A.R.E. Channel, which shows slow-moving nature scenes with ambient sounds and low-key music. While innocuous enough, just hearing the descent of a waterfall or the crickets in a forest now triggers my memories of some of the darkest nights in the hospital. I actually prefer silence to the forced and ironic juxtaposition.

The pronouncement itself is very ceremonial in nature. I was working overnight during my intern year when a nurse paged me saying that one of the patients she had been taking care of had stopped breathing. Immediately, I asked her if she had called a code blue, but she told me the patient had not wished to be resuscitated. She asked me to come pronounce her dead. Having never done a pronouncement before, I asked my supervising resident, who gave me a checklist to follow.

When I walked into the room, it was unlike a normal hospital room. The stillness was eerie. I followed the steps as I had been instructed. I lowered the sheet from the patient’s face to reveal an elderly woman, pale as paper; her mouth was wide open, her eyes shut tight. I had never met her while she was alive. I put my fingers to her wrist and felt no pulse. I listened to her chest. I could hear some sounds but at first I wasn’t sure if they were coming from my stethoscope rubbing on her chest or whether they were actual heart sounds.

“Surely, it couldn’t be her heart,” I thought, though it became immediately obvious that there was no sound to be heard. Last though, to check whether her brain was functioning, I had to assess whether she was retaining some basic brain reflexes. I pried her eye open with my fingers. I then poked the corner of her eye with my gloved finger to see if she would blink. I could think of nothing else that felt like the moist, gelatinous and perfectly still eyeball of a freshly deceased person. She didn’t blink, and therefore, it was official. The ritual, conducted for anyone who dies in the hospital, was completed.

While for a family, a death can be a moment of deep emotional significance, the reality is that as a doctor pronouncing the death, my experience is dominated by something very mundane: paperwork. Instead of being able to be fully present for the family, my time is usually spent trying to fill out the death certificate, assessing whether the case needs to be referred to the medical examiner, contacting the organ donor services if indicated, contacting the patient’s family and the primary care physician as well as other medical teams involved in caring for the patient, and consulting the patient’s next of kin about whether they would want an autopsy performed.

The hospital also eulogizes the most tragic of deaths in its own way. Deaths that are deemed to be either caused by some error or those that occur under unusual circumstances or carry some important learning point are presented to the medical staff in the form of a morbidity and mortality conference. The medical details are listed in a straightforward manner, with all of the patient’s personal traits drained out.

Much like the overarching experience of patienthood, the end of life has been sterilized. For most of human history, death has been an intensely spiritual experience. Frequently, some religious figure, a pastor or a shaman, would be at a patient’s side at the end to help make it a deep and meaningful experience not only for the patient but also for his or her family and friends. Studies show that most patients have great spiritual needs and many derive strength from their faith. These days, instead of a shaman, patients are surrounded by strangers in scrubs. Death – one of the most complex events that can occur in a hospital – is usually handled by the youngest physicians.

Since the start of my residency, I have pronounced countless patients, many of whom I had never met, and many of whom I had gotten to know very well. With time and experience I have learned that after a patient passes, my responsibility is to be more than just someone who checks off the boxes.

Recently, I pronounced a patient who had melanoma that had spread to the brain. The cancer was so advanced that it was causing her to have continuous seizures that we couldn’t control. She decided she wanted to stop trying to fight the cancer and receive only palliative care in the hospital. She just wanted to be comfortable.

When I walked into her room after the nurse told me she had passed away, her husband and daughter were sitting by the bed. The husband, whom I had gotten to know, stood up. They had put on some jazz music in the background. The daughter was holding her mother’s hand. They weren’t angry, they weren’t remorseful. They were happy.

“She is in a better place,” they said. “Her suffering is over.” Usually, in these moments, my instinct is to not linger, but this was different. Instead of poking her eyeball, I sat down and talked to them about her, asking about her life and about what she loved about jazz. It was the most full-of-life room I had been to in a long time.



Haider Javed Warraich, a fellow in cardiovascular medicine at Duke University Medical Center, is writing a book about modern death.