Scorpio is born between October 23 to November 22

Scorpio is the Eighth Sign of Zodiac and is often represented by the image of the scorpion. Read on to find out all about Scorpio, their personality traits, what it’s like to be in a relationship with a Scorpio, who they are astrologically compatible with and the best way to attract and keep a Scorpio lover.

Symbol: The Scorpion (also the serpent, eagle or phoenix)

Eighth Sign of Zodiac

Key Phrase: I desire

The Lord of Transformation

Duality: Feminine

Element: Water

Quality: Fixed

Flowers: Rhododendron and chrysanthemum

Trees: Blackthorn and bushy trees

Part of the body ruled by Scorpio: The genitals

Ruling Planet: Traditional Ruler is Mars while the modern ruler is Pluto (Mars was the ancient god of war, aggression and conflict. In astrology, Mar’s influence denotes courage, passion and competition. It can foster tension and accidents and rules over fire and danger. Pluto is the ancient god of the netherworld and of the dead. Pluto rules regenerative forces, and the beginnings and ends of the phases of life.)

Day: Tuesday

Theme: Regeneration

Tarot Card: Death

Scorpio Personality Traits

Positive Qualities: Passionate, skilled at healing, driven, powerful research abilities, emotional, sacrificing, determined

Best Quality: Idealism

Shadow Darker Side (weaknesses): Vindictive, emotionally self-centered, paranoid, destructive, criminal urges, possessive, jealous, clingy

The Scorpio zodiac sign is intense, emotional, intimate, subtle, persistent, secretive, passionate, contradicting, complex, powerful, stubborn and transformative.

Affirmation: “I am sexual and passionate, creating intimacy with everyone I encounter. My abilities to heal are great. Death is a natural part of life and it is not the end, rather death means rebirth.”

What Are People Born under the Sign of Scorpio like?

Scorpio, the scorpion… the sign of transformation … arrives in the middle of autumn when the leaves begin to change from green to the beautiful shades of orange, red, yellow and auburn. The eighth sign of the zodiac, Scorpio rules over death, arriving just in time to witness the trees becoming bare, naked and exposed … appearing to die. Scorpio is the sign of transformation, change and death, as well as the sign of sex and intimacy. A fixed water sign, Scorpio is overwhelmingly stubborn and intensely emotional. Of all of the water signs they are the most determined and forceful.

Scorpio’s are considered one of the most misunderstood signs of the zodiac. The sign of extremes, Scorpio is variously described as independent, yet clingy, powerful, yet weak, cold, yet passionate. They are a bundle of contradictions.

Although Scorpio have a pretty bad reputation, it is easy to see how people are inclined to fear them, simply because they do not understand them. Actually Scorpios are pros at concealment, and at hiding what is occurring within them. For this reason it will take time to really get to know each Scorpio.

The strength of the Scorpio is hidden in depth and they can live on my levels. On the surface, the Scorpio appears calm, cool, and impassive, sometimes even unapproachable … yet their are turbulent passions and boiling waters underneath, often invisible to others. If you look into their eyes however, you will see an intensity at times, yet they are able to conceal stirred emotions at will, presenting a calm presence.

A strong, silent type with a magnetic aura, Scorpios are known to always have a hidden agenda and it is difficult to tell what they are planning.

This sign has a well controlled nature. For them to be out of control is to be in psychic danger. When in control, according to the Scorpion, things are safe. The unevolved Scorpio tries to control people and is highly manipulative.

There exists three levels of Scorpio, the sign of transformation, as they are a symbol of the change within life and within themselves. This is the only sign of the zodiac that has three different signs to represent it … the scorpion with the poisonous tail, the eagle (a higher manifestation of a Scorpio) and the phoenix which has risen from the ashes of the fire. Also the serpent has been seen as one of the three as well.

The magic of Scorpio is in the transformation effect that they have. Often this transformation can be felt simply by having a Scorpio near for awhile, as a neighbor, co-worker, lover, etc.

Scorpios are private and secretive. They do not share their feelings openly and are selective when it comes to friendships. For the Scorpio quality weighs more than quantity. They are fiercely loyal friends, capable of great sacrifice for someone they care about. However if a friend should betray the Scorpio, they will never forget it. Those born under this sign have excellent memories. They never forget a kindness or an injury and will remember for the rest of their life. They often try to repay an act of kindness and get even for a betrayal or even a minor injury, a weakness that the more evolved Scorpio has learned to omit from their behavior.

Although Scorpios are secretive, they are quick to discover much about others, without the person ever saying a word. Their intuition is very strong and they are naturally great detectives, spies and investigators. They can sense the truth and figure things out quickly, in an almost effortless way. The things that they do not know they will pry out of people. Scorpios excel at research, delving deep into secrets to unveil the source of any problem and exposing the true essence behind any phenomenon.

Scorpios are fierce competitors, although they often conceal this from others. They love to win … need to win and often are compelled to do so at all costs.

Immense focus, dedication, determination and integrity are what Scorpio is all about. Everything that they do is emotionally charged, an ingredient to magic and magnetism. Often their intensity is so strong that it is mistaken for anger. They want to go deep into everything, fascinated by the psychology and why people do what they do. They often dwell in the occult, the idea and subject of death, sex and magic of all forms.

Read the ULTIMATE detailed guide to Scorpio men here



Negative Personality Traits

A darker side of Scorpio reveals their unwarranted jealousy, often considered one of there worst traits. The vivid imagination of the Scorpio works over time, stirring up all kinds of jealous deliriums. Possessiveness and jealous can plague the Scorpion. This sign can dive so deeply into their subconscious at times, that they lose sight of the sun, causing disillusionment, paranoia, chronic pain and depression. In certain depressing moods, the Scorpion can assume the worst in everything and everyone, stinging everything in sight, including themselves.

They can be extremely vindictive and never forget an injury or insult. The lesser evolved Scorpio will get back at others, stinging in retaliation, lacking skills of forgiveness and understanding.

Scorpios are very possessive, having a difficult time letting go of intense feelings toward a particular person, situation, idea or project. They can be very clingy.

The Romantic Nature of an Scorpio

In love, Scorpios enjoy the physical part of the relationship immensely. They adore sex, intimacy, emotional depth and basking in orgasmic energy. Scorpio’s powerful emotional level finds a positive outlet through sex. In an intimate relationship, you must expose your hidden self. Exposure of your true self is what intimacy is all about. In a relationship a Scorpio is not just participating in a partnership, rather they are fusing with their lover. Noted for their unpredictability, a relationship with a Scorpio will be anything but ordinary … reaching a depth that is transformational and spiritual.

Scorpios are intense, passionate and extremely physical in love. They will transform their lover, changing them in a way where they will never be the same. Determined, elusive, magnetic and oh so sexy, Scorpios are often quiet, however they are quick to reveal deeper layers of themselves to someone who has the depth to really hear what they are saying. They love to be listened too and know when someone is pretending and lacking integrity and honesty.

It can often solicit trouble, when trying to figure out a Scorpio, whose feelings and thoughts are kept secret, because it causes one to guess. Often these guesses are incorrect, merely projections of ones fears, hopes and insecurities. Although it takes a while to get to know a Scorpio, if you really listen to them they will reveal to you only the truth, making it easier to understand their complex nature. Scorpios speak with integrity, honesty and directness.

If they desire to have you, their magnetism with pull you near. They will cast a spell with their hypnotic eyes and will be very determined to have you. Fascinating and irresistible to the apple of their eye, Scorpios are mysterious with a magical quality about them. They are difficult to get close to and trust will not come easily, however once they open up and lower their defences, they expect their vulnerability to be respected and taken good care of.

It takes a man who knows how to hold his own to win the heart of a Scorpio woman. The Scorpion man makes a woman feel as though she is the very best she can be. He likes a woman to have a sexual undertone, that is only for him.

This sign can see through a person and perceive all of their hidden insecurities and motives … You may learn more about yourself than you knew before. That is, if they share what they see.

A Scorpio can be very generous, loving, kind and loyal. Their are few people in the world that really matter to them. If they care about someone they can be very sacrificing, bending over backwards at times, proving their devotion, loyalty and the depth of their relationship. Once betrayed, however the Scorpio relationship will change quickly and permanently. Best advice when in a relationship with a Scorpio … be good to them and they will be exceptional to you. Never lie to them. They value honesty and will settle for no less.

For the eighth sign of the zodiac trust is everything, something that may take time to develop. They can be very suspicious, jealous, possessive and demanding, commanding their partner to comfort them, please them and make them feel safe, secure and unified in the relationship. Their magnetism is electric. Their emotional intensity is hypnotic and penetrating. Their depth is immeasurable, bottomless.

A natural love for the occult, sex magic, death and all things of shadow, Scorpios are anything but mundane. They have X-ray eyes, turning everything they look at into a transparent image that reveals all. They project an aura of mystery and power.

In love, Scorpios have abundant emotional strength and courage. A sense of purpose is important to them and in love that purpose is intimacy and union. They want to know their partner in and out.

Ruled by Mars, the god of war, and Pluto, the ancient god of the netherworld and of the dead, Scorpios energy has a passionate and hot interior beneath a cool and calm exterior.

Nothing brings out the extremes of the Scorpio character as much as sex. This sign is exciting in the bedroom … iconic in their natural lovemaking abilities. The art of the tantra comes effortless to the Scorpion born, as sex takes on unusual depth, laced in spirituality, erotic bliss and ecstasy. Irresistibly hypnotic with an extraordinary sexual magnetism and eyes that penetrate to the core, Scorpio can see straight through to your soul. Scorpio energy can be quite aggressive and they may enjoy rough sex. In lovemaking, they will read your mind.

How to attract a Scorpio

If you want to seduce a Scorpio, look them in the eyes. Bare your soul, with no need to hide, through eye contact. Be intimate and real with them. Scorpio men are attracted to sexiness in a woman and Scorpio woman are attracted to assertiveness in a man. Scorpios are mysterious, yet they love to uncover a good mystery … so give them one and watch them begin to reveal what is beneath the veil.

To attract a Scorpio, number one, tell the truth always. Never lie, mislead or pretend. Superficially does not mix well with a Scorpio. This is an immediate turn off. Listen to them with your full attention. Scorpios are extremely curious and will listen just as well as they expect to be listened to.

Find out exactly how to attract and keep a Scorpio Man

Scorpio’s Love Sign Combinations

A Scorpio has some Sun Signs that they get along better with than others, although it is important to consider that the Sun Sign is only a small portion of the imprint that stars make on an individual. Just because a Sun Sign match is challenging, difficult or unlikely does not mean it is impossible. In reality there is no 100% typical Scorpio relationship, as every Scorpio is slightly different. The positions of Venus, Mars, Neptune, and all the other planets at the time of birth all influence personality.

The most compatible signs with Scorpio are generally considered to be Cancer, Virgo, Capricorn and Pisces.

Famous Sun Signs in Scorpio

Pablo Picasso

Hillary R. Clinton

Saint Augustine

Bjork

Jodie Foster

Bill Gates

Ted Turner

Unlock a Scorpio man’s heart after reading this fascinating guide!