The INSIDER Summary:

• The best way to burn fat is by walking, not by doing intense cardio.

• The more intense the cardio, the lower the percentage of calories you burn from fat sources.

• More extreme cardio can also lead to more injuries and a larger appetite.





If you're looking to burn fat, ditch the expensive spin classes and grueling runs and try something a little simpler: walking.

Nutritionist and celebrity trainer Harley Pasternak, whose client list includes Kim Kardashian, Ariana Grande, and Lady Gaga, says intense cardio isn't the best way to a svelte figure.

In fact, for some people, cardio can be somewhat counterproductive.

According to Pasternak, the more intense the cardio you do, the more calories per minute you'll burn — however, a higher percentage of those calories will come from non-fat sources than if you were engaging in less-intense cardio like walking.

In other words, yes, you're burning a lot of calories, but not a lot of fat.

There's one more thing that speaks against intense cardio: hunger.

Pasternak says there's a direct relationship between the intensity of cardio you do and your appetite. The more intense your cardio workout, the hungrier you'll be afterward, which can lead to you eating more than you normally would.

"You hear people after a spin class, they get out of there and they're ravenous," Pasternak said. "And they go have a gluten-free scone and a fresh-pressed, sugar-laden juice."

And if that's not enough to convince you, you're also more likely to get injured doing more extreme cardio. According to Pasternak, repetitive stress syndrome, knee injuries, and back injuries are all risks associated with extreme cardio.

While he doesn't necessarily advise against running or spin class, Pasternak says the average person who's looking to trim fat might be somewhat intimidated by the prospect of doing intense cardio every day.

Walking, on the other hand, is often viewed as a more accessible method of exercise by people of all skill levels.

Pasternak, who has studied the eating habits of the healthiest countries in the world, says that while the diets of people in these countries differ greatly, they all do a lot of walking.

According to Pasternak, the average American takes 4,100 steps in a day, while people in the healthiest countries take more than 10,000 steps a day.

Because of this, Pasternak gives all his clients a daily step goal that ranges from 10,000 to 14,000 steps.

"People want to know how do we get the prettiest bodies in the world in shape — this is how I do it, not being sedentary," he said.