Britt Hermes worked as a naturopath for three years, until she discovered her boss, himself a naturopath, had been illegally importing and injecting cancer patients with a drug not approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

Now pursuing a career in biomedical research, Hermes has become one of alternative medicine’s most dogged critics, writing, blogging and tweeting about what she calls naturopathy’s “distinctly dangerous” and dubious therapies, like the 30-year-old San Diego woman who died in March after an IV injection of a tumeric solution (the woman had sought treatment from a naturopath for eczema), or the Arizona naturopath who uses intravenous injections of sterile, pure, liquid sodium bicarbonate — advertised as her “baking soda cancer treatment”— to neutralize the “acidity” of tumours.

This week, when Hermes saw a tweet promoting a series of YouTube videos produced by the Canadian Association of Naturopathic Doctors highlighting its members’ “medical training,” she responded with what has become one of her signature responses:

“FALSE,” she tweeted. “Naturopathic doctors’ are not medically trained. They learn pseudoscience. Stop lying.’”

Hermes and other critics argue the campaign suggests naturopaths receive the same training, and complete the same licensing exams, as “real” medical doctors and that the profession is trying to increase its legitimacy and position its services as science-based, when much of what it offers has little to no grounding in science.

Originally launched last September but now being re-promoted, with more ads expected to roll out this year, “Medically Trained. Naturally Focused” campaign by the association of naturopathic doctors features a series of YouTube videos with the tagline, “True or False?”

One asks, for example, “True or False? Naturopathic doctors are medically trained?”

“Of course we are,” responds a naturopath dressed in a white lab coat and carrying a stethoscope. The voiceover intones, “It’s time for a second opinion about your health” and directs viewers to “FindMyND.ca”

The videos, taken from earlier TV commercials, are part of a three-year plan “to educate the public and to ensure they’re aware who naturopathic doctors are and what they do,” said Shawn O’Reilly, executive director of the Canadian Association of Naturopathic Doctors.

Though they are “very definitely not medical doctors,” O’Reilly said naturopaths have “very similar training” and that the primary difference between a conventional and naturopathic doctor is their “philosophical approach” to patients.

“(Naturopaths) treat patients as an individual and look at all aspects of their health,” she said.

Admission to training programs requires an undergraduate degree (in any field) plus prerequisite sciences. The four-year, full-time program includes basic sciences, clinical sciences and diagnostics, she said.

According to Hermes, who in 2011 graduated from Washington state’s Bastyr University — an accredited naturopathic training program recognized by the Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine — the training is distinctly and wholly different to medical school.

She said students aren’t required to take medical entrance exams, the prerequisite sciences course are introductory-level (“It’s like, Chemistry 101”) and naturopaths don’t have to complete residency or post-graduate training, unlike conventional doctors who, depending which speciality they pick, face a minimum two years and up to four years or more in residency programs.

“They take classes with the same names as medical school courses,” added Hermes. “But pseudoscience and nonsensical information is integrated into every course.”

For example, Hermes said she learned to treat neurological conditions such as Parkinson’s with homeopathic remedies and high doses of intravenous vitamins. Her paediatrics course, she said, was filled with “anti-vaccine propaganda.”

O’Reilly said the childhood vaccination schedule is taught within the training programs and that the position of the CAND as well as the profession “is that we understand the value of the role of vaccines and we are not opposed to vaccination.”

However, a study published last week led by University of Alberta health policy expert Timothy Caulfield found that, of 330 naturopath websites analyzed, 40 included “vaccine hesitancy discourse” and 26 offered vaccine or flu shot alternatives.

Reporting in the Journal of Law and the Biosciences, Caulfield and his colleagues said the discourse ranged from the overtly anti-vaxx to “those that subtly undermine the relevant science.” Some linked thimerosal, a mercury-based preservative, to autism and Asperger Syndrome, even though Caulfield said there is no credible evidence to support such a link and that almost all vaccines in Canada are made without thimerosal.

Caulfield is calling for a tightening of advertising laws, reducing the ability of alternative medicine providers to self-regulate and restricting their ability to offer unproven tests and treatments. (Five provinces have passed legislation regulating naturopaths.)

“They’re really trying to have it both ways,” Caulfield said. “The messaging is, one, ‘We are science-based, we’re medically trained, we are healthcare professionals.’

“The second is, ‘Yeah, but we’re different. We’re based on natural medicine, we’re about getting to the root causes. We’re not like those other health care professionals and so you should come see us.’”

He said the practice is premised on the ideal of “vitalism,” the belief in a “supernatural life-force energy.”

In an earlier study, Caulfield found that, almost without exception, naturopaths advertise scientifically unsupported therapies such as homeopathy, colon cleanses, ozone therapy, ionic footbaths, hair analysis and IV vitamin therapy.

“So, it’s very misleading to say ‘medically trained’ as I think most would interpret this as ‘science-trained.’”

In a written response to questions from the National Post, the Canadian College of Naturopathic Medicine said more than 80 per cent of its students “come in with a health sciences type of degree” and that 1,400 hours are spent on basic medical science courses such as biochemistry, anatomy and embryology.

“The first two years focus on the biomedical sciences and indeed, some of the textbooks are identical to medical textbooks,” the statement said.

Naturopaths are regulated in five provinces – B.C, Alberta, Saskatchewan.

Manitoba and Ontario. As well, “Any ND (naturopathic doctor) practising in Ontario is required by regulation to make it known that they are a ‘ND’, NOT an MD,” the college said.

Still, Brighton, Ont. family physician Dr. Michelle Cohen worries naturopaths are positioning themselves as “primary care” or family doctors. “They’re not doing the same kind of screening tests we do, they don’t do preventive medicine the way we do and they don’t manage the same kinds of complex and chronic medical issues family doctors do,” she said.

“There is really no comparison.”

• Email: skirkey@nationalpost.com | Twitter: sharon_kirkey