In the major leagues this season, batters have been hitting the ball so hard, and so far, that pitchers are suggesting foul play. “ There’s just something different about the baseballs ,” one veteran reliever complained earlier this summer. “I don’t have anything to quantify it, but the balls just don’t feel the same.” It’s been an unprecedented year for home runs: hitters are on pace to shatter the previous single-season record for them (5,693), which was set in 2000, at the height of the steroid era, when sluggers were making widespread and illegal use of performance-enhancing drugs. In June, players hit more home runs than in any previous month in the game’s history (1,101), sometimes in gaudy fashion, as when seven different players hit grand slams in a single day ( another record ). Some pitchers claim the balls are being wound differently, making them soar farther off the bat; others say the seams are depressed, and that they’re getting less movement on their pitches as a result. Thirty years ago, the league also saw a sudden increase in home runs; then, too, players and coaches openly speculated about whether a so-called rabbit ball was responsible. (The power surge subsided by the following season, only adding to the mystery.) As in the past, the league denies anything is awry, but a few recent studies, which analyze the rise in the exit velocity of batted balls , may show otherwise.

Under the circumstances, it was easy to miss another major-league record being set this week. Granted, it was somewhat obscure. It concerned one of baseball’s most pleasurable and least appreciated feats: the immaculate inning.

Rick Porcello, the starting pitcher for the Red Sox, threw one in a win against the Tampa Bay Rays on Wednesday night. He struck out the side—three up, three down—on nine consecutive pitches. It was the eighth immaculate inning pitched this season, which topped the previous high (seven), from 2014. This being baseball, there are precise specifications for how to earn this distinction: each pitch has to be a strike, and every batter has to be struck out. There are more economical ways to end an inning, three pitches being the swiftest. (While that level of efficiency is rare, it’s not unheard of .) But the immaculate inning is more dazzling, a triumph of trinitarian symmetry. Porcello is tall and rangy, with a tidy, easeful delivery. Working from the windup, he rocks back, lifting his arms over his head, before tucking his leg with a gentle kick and rearing toward the plate. There’s a rhythm to his motion, and his crisp strikes hit the catcher’s glove like some declarative punctuation, neither too loud nor too soft. Then the cycle repeats—pitch by pitch, batter by batter. It all has the feeling of perfection.

Pitching accolades generally depend on complete-game accomplishments (the shutout, the no-hitter, the perfect game). And a moundsman’s prowess is generally defined by clear and objective terms (a win-loss record, earned-run average, the number of strikeouts or walks administered). What an immaculate inning communicates is more limited, but also more exquisite—it is a degree of momentary flawlessness. That it couldn’t possibly be sustained for much longer is precisely the beauty of it. Earlier this month, when the Yankees ace Dellin Betances threw an immaculate sixth against the Tigers, none of the batters he faced even made contact with any of his pitches. The Yankees went on to lose the game.

There have only been eighty-nine immaculate innings in major-league history—far fewer than no-hitters, of which there have been roughly three hundred. With a no-hitter, or a perfect game, the sense of expectation mounts as a pitcher works his way into the later innings. Everyone from the pitcher’s teammates (who, as the superstition goes, give him the silent treatment) to the fans in attendance can feel the momentousness of the occasion. The sportswriter Joe Sheehan, who was at Yankee Stadium earlier this month when Betances threw his immaculate inning, said he only noticed what was happening after five pitches. Betances threw another strike, then faced Miguel Cabrera, one of the most fearsome hitters in baseball. When Betances, improbably, struck him out with a slider, there weren’t bells and whistles in the ballpark. “It’s not clear to me how many people were aware of the significance of the moment , beyond Betances striking out the side, or for that matter, Betances throwing nine consecutive strikes,” Sheehan wrote afterward.

As for the immaculateness this year, it’s true that the increased tendency to swing for home runs comes with an additional likelihood that one will miss: strikeouts have also spiked to record rates. As some disgruntled commentators have pointed out , a third of all at-bats now end without the ball being put in play. Batters are hitting home runs, drawing walks, or striking out. The baseball writer Rany Jazayerli dubbed these the “Three True Outcomes,” undistorted by such fickle factors as fielding and foot speed. Critics complain that this is a more bloodless and blunted version of the game.

But the immaculate inning, partly a by-product of this style, is still a quirky and elegant reminder of baseball’s persistent poetry. After Porcello’s performance on Wednesday night, I e-mailed John Thorn, the official historian of Major League Baseball, looking for a wise pronouncement about what the single-season record for immaculate innings could mean in a year dominated by the long ball. His answer, which mooted my question, reassured me.