Republicans who had gathered for the morning workout before Thursday night’s annual congressional baseball game were blunt about their sense of vulnerability.

“The field was essentially a killing field,” said Senator Rand Paul of Kentucky, who was there when the shooting happened. “You had no way to defend yourself.”

The emboldened response on the right illustrated how much the center of gravity has shifted in the gun debate. As Republican lawmakers grow more uniformly conservative and centered outside urban areas, few prominent voices in the party are willing to support gun control measures.

This is a striking departure from recent political history, when clashes over gun rights often fell along regional rather than partisan lines. The Republican majorities on Capitol Hill have blocked every attempt to enact significant gun control legislation, most recently after the massacre of 49 people in an Orlando, Fla., nightclub last June. Measures to block people on the federal terrorism watch list from buying weapons and to close background-check loopholes failed in the Senate.

And that was before President Trump was elected with far more help from the National Rifle Association than Mitt Romney got in 2012. Mr. Trump received more money from the N.R.A. than any other outside group.

“You came through big for me, and I am going to come through for you,” he told N.R.A. members at the group’s annual convention in April, the first time a president had addressed such a gathering in person since Ronald Reagan. “The eight-year assault on your Second Amendment freedoms has come to a crashing end.”

Video

With no appetite in Congress or the White House for restrictions on gun access, Democrats have become all but resigned to inaction. And with one of their colleagues in critical condition, many were muted on Wednesday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“The problem is that nobody looks for a middle ground,” said Representative Steve Cohen, Democrat of Tennessee.

Mr. Cohen said part of the difficulty was that many Republicans in right-leaning districts are more afraid of conservative primary challengers than of Democrats in general elections. And few interest groups have as much clout among Republican primary voters as the N.R.A.

“They have an N.R.A. rating they want to keep,” he said.

Stymied in Washington, gun control activists have taken their fight to state capitals, city halls and corporate boardrooms.

“This is a marathon,” said Shannon Watts, who leads Moms Demand Action for Gun Sense in America, a group that sprang up after the 2012 elementary school shooting in Newtown, Conn.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ms. Watts reeled off the gun restrictions the group has helped enact since shifting its focus away from Congress. Seven states have passed laws tightening the sale of firearms at gun shows since the Newtown massacre, and retailers such as Target and Chipotle have begun asking patrons not to bring in weapons. Any new federal laws, she conceded, would take several more elections.

As for the calls from Republicans to empower more people to carry weapons, Ms. Watts said, “if more guns and fewer laws was the best solution, we would be the safest country in the world.”

But with death threats against members of Congress already on the rise before Wednesday, Republican leaders are in no mood to rethink their gun rights stances.

Mr. Garrett, who has received threats this year, said it was not only lawmakers who deserved the right to protect themselves.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“There shouldn’t be one standard for members of Congress and another for citizens who otherwise have the same right to self-defense,” he said.

To many Republicans, the issue is fundamental.

Representative Mo Brooks of Alabama, who helped apply a tourniquet on Mr. Scalise, wasted no time dismissing a question at the Capitol about whether his views on gun rights had changed.

“As with any constitutional provision in the Bill of Rights, there are adverse aspects to each of those rights that we enjoy as people,” Mr. Brooks said. “And what we just saw here is one of the bad side effects of someone not exercising those rights properly.”