The Peaches were reborn about seven years ago as part of the WWII Girls Baseball Living History League, a tribute to the league that was founded in 1943 and that was recreated on screen with Madonna in the outfield, Geena Davis behind the plate and Tom Hanks in the dugout, managing the team with a memorable emphasis on no tears.

Photo

Rebecca Tulloch, who conducts historical presentations at schools and libraries, founded the new league. In 2009, she bought a replica of an All-American Girls Professional Baseball League uniform.

“After I got the uniform,” she said, “‘I’m like ‘Gosh, I’d really like to play ball in this.’”

Tulloch knew of men’s baseball leagues that dressed up in vintage uniforms and played by old-time rules, but she could not find any groups recreating the games played by women during the World War II era. So she made an obvious decision: She formed a league of her own.

Photo

Tulloch started recruiting by word of mouth, aiming for a league composed of the four original teams: the Rockford Peaches, the South Bend Blue Sox, the Racine Belles and the Kenosha Comets. So far only the Peaches have been reconstituted; this summer, about 20 players have regularly participated.

“My dream is to eventually have all four teams filled with players,” Tulloch said. “Then we can have a real league where teams play each other at events, and then have a championship at the end, like the original league.”

The league’s uniforms and equipment are, as much as possible, faithful reproductions of items from the World War II era. Players scour eBay and antique stores for vintage gloves and bats. In the dugout here, there was a bucket filled with smooth-worn pancake gloves.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“They are teeny,” said Jamie Mulvihill, who has played softball most of her life and, when there weren’t enough girls for a team, spent a season on a boys’ baseball team. “They definitely bring you back to the Little League days where you catch with two hands ’cause the ball will fall out and bop you if you don’t.”

Photo

Proper softballs can be hard to procure. They must be 12 inches in circumference, the biggest size produced, white and made of real leather. With the prevalence of Optic Yellow softballs today, white ones have become less popular, and they tend to be made of synthetic leather. A dozen white leather 12-inch balls cost around $80, compared with $30 for a synthetic dozen.

During the game here, an infantry re-enactor hit a foul ball that flew into the nearby Fox River. It was not recovered.

“A lot of people don’t realize that when the league started in 1943, they didn’t play baseball, like in the movie ‘A League of their Own,’” Tulloch said. “They were playing 12-inch underhand fast-pitch softball, the reason being because none of the women knew how to play baseball.”

Only during the league’s last couple of years, after the war had ended, did the women switch to baseball — partly in hopes of making the games exciting enough to attract fans of the reinvigorated major leagues.

“I wouldn’t join another team after this. This is the best. I love 12-inch,” Joy Hyzny, a player in her early 50s, said as she tossed a ball with her teammate Kathy Suyko, firing it hard enough to make a smacking sound in Suyko’s antique glove. “My high school team went down to 8, and after that, there was no more 12-inch — I couldn’t find it in the area. I love it. It’s such a great group of women. All ages, diverse backgrounds. It’s so much fun.”