Blake was by all accounts a force of nature, by turns charming (he worked while wearing a knit cap that read “Janitor”) and explosive (everyone had a story of being fired by him, then rehired soon after). “A tough man for a tough mountain,” Rick Richards wrote in “Ski Pioneers: Ernie Blake, His Friends & the Making of Taos Ski Valley.” When Blake died in 1989, the ski patrol threw 21 hand charges from Highline Ridge in salute.

Back on the chairlift, Matt explained how Blake’s dream today unfolds like an origami. You never see much of the ski resort at once. The lower front side has bump runs. The upper has steep glades and chutes. Chairs 8 and 7 hold most of the cruisers.

To warm up, we raced down a front-side groomed run or two. Though it hadn’t snowed in days and the Southwest sun had been bright, the snow was surprisingly good. I couldn’t keep pace with John, who arced over the swales and zoomed past the slow skiers. At the lift his smile was big; he was home again.

Those chairlifts were another eye opener: Taos still doesn’t possess a single high-speed lift. People had told me the mountain didn’t need it. I was skeptical. But now I saw they were right — for the moment, anyway. This mountain is steep and compact, and even a slower lift doesn’t take long to reach its destination. It helped, too, that there was almost no one here. On the Sunday of Presidents’ Day weekend last year the lift line was perhaps three minutes long. The next afternoon, still a holiday, the day lodge was so empty I had to hunt for five minutes to find a cashier to pay for my lunch.

Terrain may be one reason the crowds aren’t here. Taos doesn’t boast an incredible amount to entertain beginners and intermediates for more than a few days. Just a quarter of the skiing is devoted to each. The rest of the trail map — more than half — is covered in black (expert) runs. That’s not ideal for a ski resort. Intermediate skiers are the bread-and-butter of the ski industry. Taos has always been a mountain for experts, however, or at least for those who are willing to get off the groomed runs and push themselves.

5 miles Taos Ski Valley Eagle Nest WHEELER PEAK 150 522 64 64 Taos COLO. Area of detail NEW MEXICO NEW MEXICO TEXAS

And when Taos says “expert,” it means it. As we rode up Chair 2, the upper front side of the mountain reared up in a steep wall of spruce and fir, with tilted rock gardens. The only thing missing was the mannequin named Slim Slidell, which the ski patrol places facedown near the top of the lift, beside a sign that reminds skiers that they should know how to stop their own uncontrolled falls on the tilted slopes. (Name another ski resort that’s willing to put out a fake dead body to jar its guests.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Want to take a hike?” Matt said. We’d barely warmed up when Matt tossed skis over shoulders. I learned quickly that to really experience the best Taos skiing, you need to be willing to hoof it, at least briefly. A three-minute hike left us atop West Ridge, one of Taos’s marquee zones. Gullies spilled below: Stauffenberg, Oster, Fabian. Blake named them for the heroes who tried to kill Hitler. (Later I would see a run named for Patton.) We dropped in one at a time. Despite the lack of new snow, our edges gripped well, like knives in Styrofoam. Then I heard a sound. It was the rare sight of the expert-skier Matt, sliding past on his belly “Self-arrest!” I yelled. But this was Taos; Matt just kept going. He could have used the reminder of Slim Slidell.

He dusted himself off and we headed to Kachina Peak. Mr. Bacon isn’t on the hook for the idea of the chairlift; the idea was approved by the forest service and set in motion before he bought the ski area. Still, it’s brought both attention and controversy. Hiking Kachina Peak to ski fresh snow had long been a Taos rite of passage. Years ago, a centuries-old pot was found amid its boulders below the summit. So for many reasons, many people didn’t want the lift. They called it sacrilege.

John was one of them. Before we succumbed to progress he demanded that we hike the peak one last time: “I don’t want to ride that lift without first honoring the gods!” We grudgingly trudged up the ridgeline with him. “Kachina Peak, it’s a truth-teller,” he said of the hike. “It tells you how you’re doing. Whether you’re young, or you’re old, you’re hung over. It doesn’t always let you go to the top.” He called to Matt, “Remember the last time I was here — a guy I’d never met was hugging me and crying in my arms? The hiking brings out something in people.”

For 20 minutes we walked higher. Kachina is shaped like a downward-facing palm, with its radiating fingerlike chutes. Still 10 minutes from the summit, John peered over the edge of one of the first couloirs. “Well, this looks good,” he said. “Shall we do it?”

Photo

“What about going to the top!”

“I’m no zealot,” he replied. We laughed at him, then stepped into our skis and dove into a couloir called K2. The run was firm and chalky — and busy. Snowboarders stranded in the hourglass couloirs plugged the tight spots like corks. The new summit lift had opened a few days previous, and was already such a hit that the peak’s mogul-covered face looked as though it had the mumps. Matt and John sighed but seemed resigned. John tried to see the bright side. Now there was even more terrain for experts like him, he said.

We took the new lift and stood on the mountaintop. There, Matt checked off the names of mountains I had never heard of: Truchas, Jemez, Culebras, 14,000-foot Blanca Peak in Colorado, Spanish Peaks (also in Colorado). And everywhere, Matt shouted greetings to people he knew. Everybody knows everybody here. He said hi to Gary Johnson, a former governor of New Mexico who is a die-hard skier and who has a house in the area. “I joke and say that it’s not a season pass, it’s a membership card,” Matt told me on the lift. “It’s like a working-class country club. It’s not snooty. The locals are here, working hard, because they love to ski.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

It doesn’t take long to feel the pull of this place, a Southwestern mellowness that balances the adrenal-squeeze of its skiing. Another writer once called it the Tao of Taos. This place feels like a throwback to an earlier, simpler time, when overeducated ski devotees searched for just the right place in the mountains, until they found themselves surrounded by like-minded people at the end of a snowy, dead-end canyon, and put their Ph.D. degrees to work washing dishes. And they never left. Today more than 125 employees have worked at Taos Ski Valley for at least 20 years. Later, on the lift, when I asked a guy if he’d been here a long time, he replied, “Eighteen years. So some would say yes, some would say no. …”

From the mountaintop, somebody smelled a barbecue. We barreled to the valley and skied right into a classic Taos scene: the sunny half-acre of the St. Bernard lodge’s big deck, packed with skiers eating what everybody there always eats — the green chile cheeseburger, covered with blue cheese and pickles. Call it Prilosec on a bun. (If you’re looking for a lunch that comes with an arugula garnish, skier, pass by.) Behind the spatula is another Taos notable, Jean Mayer, 80 and chestnut brown from his decades in the sun. He started both the St. Bernard and Taos’s ski school, which has often been called the country’s best.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

This isn’t to say that Taos doesn’t need some help. While some of Blake’s contrarian impulses made this place special, others didn’t necessarily serve the resort well in the 21st century. Blake, and his family, who took over after his death, were debt averse. Their primary investment was in the mountain, not the base area. The family never built lodging. They also banned snowboarding from the slopes until 2008. “With the highest regard to the Blake family and the previous ownership, we’d stalled out a bit,” said Gordon Briner, the chief executive. “We hadn’t put in a major ski lift in more than 20 years. We haven’t built a major building in the base area in over 20 years.” As a result, he said, “We’ve lost people. I don’t think we’ve driven them away, but I think other resorts have done a good job of making themselves attractive.”

2015 Ski Issue

Bringing a beloved throwback hill into the 21st century, carefully, is Mr. Bacon’s goal. To that end, several upgrades, both on and off the hill, are underway. Last winter Taos opened the Wild West, 60 acres of gladed terrain that’s accessible via a short hike and then a traverse around the western side of the resort. (It was not yet open when we visited, but we skirted the edges; it looks like a great addition.) The resort also bulked up its snow-making, which will help it appeal to families wanting to plan a holiday vacation with peace of mind.

The most obvious changes are happening in the valley. There’s no coherent base village at Taos now because the place was originally populated by self-contained ski lodges that each fed, housed and entertained its own guests. Walking around at night after skiing, the place felt like a train derailment, with lodges like scattered rail cars around the foot of the mountain. “The base area experience doesn’t match the mountain ski experience,” Mr. Briner said. “We have fewer beds today in Taos Ski Valley than we had 20 years ago,” he added.

That’s starting to change. An 80-room slopeside hotel, with suites and condos will open for the 2016-17 season. The resort also will upgrade ticket counters, and a rental shop that’s more than 30 years old. The new owner plans a completely reimagined base village, with a plaza, condos, a “streetscape” and other changes. No timetable has yet been set on this second stage, Mr. Briner said. There’s no interest in making this feel like those cookie-cutter base villages developed by Intrawest in the 1990s at places like Whistler Blackcomb in British Columbia and Copper Mountain in Colorado. “We’re trying to get ambience and feeling that is in some of the classic ski villages in the world, some lodging, some shopping, some fine dining” that creates a place that people want to linger, Mr. Briner said.

The prospect both excites and worries lovers of Taos. They worry about big changes. Many also seem to recognize that something needs to be done to keep Taos relevant. And they hope that Mr. Bacon, who owns a home here and who has donated millions to environmental causes, might be the right man to do it.

“When the opportunity came about to purchase Taos Ski Valley, I felt strongly that there was an opportunity to build a sustainable business while simultaneously preserving and protecting the distinct character and setting of the area,” Mr. Bacon said in an email. “We established three goals: to upgrade the infrastructure and experience, to safeguard Taos’s unique character and to earn a return on our investment. Any two of these are doable, but accomplishing all three will be a challenge. I’m confident that by focusing on the first two goals now, we’ll get them all right for the future.”