30 Cleaning Hacks that Will Clean Your Car Better (And Faster) Than You Ever Have

Does your car look and smell so horrible that you’re embarrassed to have friends ride with you? Do you wish you had that new-car smell and shine? Have you considered taking it in for detailing?

Chances are that like many of us you practically live in your car, which can get pretty grimy from all those fun roadtrips (with the dogs) and stops for burgers at the drive-in. Even those of us who just use our cars to commute to work and back need a deep cleaning.

The good news is you don’t need to pay someone else to get your car clean. You can get your car in tip-top shape in no time — all by yourself!

Detailing your own car is no easy task but you can do it easily without dishing out hardly any money at all. If you’ve never done it before, you may be tempted to buy all that expensive products you see in the car departments in stores to get the job done right. The store shelves are lined with special wipes, brushes and solvents for detailing cars. And all these items add up to alot of money. Do you actually need all this stuff?

In reality, you don’t need to buy brand-name cleansers and air fresheners made especially for cars. Some of them don’t even work that well despite the expense. You may not even need to buy anything at all to do your detailing in fact. Things like club soda, white vinegar, charcoal, a can of coke or even a piece of clay are really all you need. Chances are you already have most the stuff you need to get your car sparklingly clean inside and out.

These cleaning hacks we’ve compiled for you are tried and true. In fact, some of our top 30 hacks work so well that they’re old news to professionals, who wish we’d kept their tricks a secret. After trying out some of these innovative ways to clean your car, you’ll never even think about hiring someone else to do it for you. In fact, if you just turn up the music and roll up your sleeves, you may even have some fun doing it.

So, check out our tips and gather all the common household items that you will need to make your car looking and smelling like new again. You’ll never be embarrassed in having a dirty car again. In fact, your friends may start asking you, “Who does your detailing?’

ADVERTISEMENT: