A college student in Columbia, South Carolina was kidnapped by three men at gunpoint. Fearing the worst, she used some Jason Bourne level-problem solving and her manual transmission car to get away safely.



According to newspaper The State, 20-year-old Jordan Dinsmore found herself in one of the worst situations possible when three men approached her, pushed her to the ground and put a gun to her head. The publication reports that they forced her to drive her car and withdraw money from an ATM and then told her that she was going to be taken to a location to be raped.



Advertisement

But Dinsmore had one advantage, The State reports—when the men first put her into the car they couldn’t drive it because it had a manual transmission, so they made her take the driver’s seat. That is when she concocted a plan to escape. After she withdrew $300 out of the ATM, she got back into the car and left her seatbelt off, she hoped her kidnappers didn’t notice the seatbelt alarm chiming.



One of the men instructed her to drive to his relatives’ house so one of his friends could have sex with her. From The State:



“I was thinking somehow I have to get out of this,” Dinsmore said. “Can I crash the car? No, because it might knock me out and not them. Can I pull over or something? I have to get away from them.”

The Slate reports that she purposefully missed the turn and rolled her car into the intersection, threw her car in neutral, then she opened the door and jumped out, while the vehicle was moving at 35 mph.



Advertisement

Once she landed she screamed for help, a woman came to her and called 911. Dinsmore suffered only minor scrapes and bruises from her escape and her 2009 Scion even managed to be in pretty decent shape after the attackers crashed it, The State reports.



Dinsmore is a criminal justice major who hopes to someday be in the FBI knew that in these situations you have to do whatever you can to get away. From The State:



“If they get you out of the public eye, they’re going to do something worse to you and shoot you anyway,” Dinsmore recalled her mother saying.

Even though she managed to escape she still has trouble sleeping, but is thankful her attackers didn’t know how to drive a manual transmission car.



“I’m going to be driving a manual for the rest of my life,” The State quoted her as saying.

