Using photos, animations and interactive graphics, the app lays out the stories of endangered animals around the globe. The beautiful images speak for themselves in many cases, but the program also has plenty of data — for example, it points out that efforts to protect the endangered giant panda in China have helped increase the number of wild pandas over the last decade. WWF Together also has 360-degree photos of habitats, as well as educational games.

Photo

A lot of the content is free, but unlocking all the available material costs $2. WWF Together is available on iOS and Android.

Photo

#Climate is a different sort of environmental awareness app that lets you take part in activism from the comfort of your sofa or office desk. You can customize the app’s settings to be told about the kind of environmental issues that matter to you, be they topic-specific, regional or global. It then pulls together relevant “actions” promoted by hundreds of different environmental groups.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Tapping on one of the actions reveals more information, and you can sign up for alerts on news that interests you. The app makes it easy to share information on social media, aiming to educate more people. #Climate is free on iOS.

To get an amazing scientific and pictorial view of what’s happening to our planet, look no further than Earth Now from NASA, which is free on iOS and Android. This app is built around a stunning, interactive 3-D model of Earth that shows graphics of sea-level changes and other detailed information like carbon dioxide levels.

Photo

The app is designed to be a hands-on way to discover information about our planet. NASA updates the data regularly, adding up-to-the-minute content like satellite images of large storms and other major events. It’s fascinating to dial through the content, and the visuals are striking.

Photo

Lastly, check out Tinybop’s The Earth. This is a simplified version of the Earth Now app, aimed at teaching children about environmental matters including volcanos and erosion. It has a gamelike interface that uses simple but eye-catching graphics. The app does not delve into man-made environmental problems, but helps to give users a fundamental understanding of how our planet works. It’s free on iOS.

The point of many of these apps is to help spur action, so don’t forget to put down your phone, too.

Quick Call

Dials Calendar offers a surprising new way to view coming calendar events — as a clock face display, which is very different from the traditional listlike view or week-to-a-page display. I found this sort of visualization of calendar events really helped me get a grip on what I have planned and how much time each event will take up. The app is free on iOS.