Photo of my newborn son: Missy Hagen/Grandma

Impending fatherhood is a slow, rolling tidal wave of unfamiliar emotions. Even though the father’s emotions aren’t the main focus of the pregnancy, they are important to manage. That means mitigating potential stressors ahead of time so that you can properly enjoy the arrival of your tiny new family member.

At the top of the list for many: negotiating paternity leave. More and more forward-thinking companies, influential papas like Mark Zuckerberg, and states such as New York are setting a new, refreshing standard for American paternity.



Advertisement

If you’re lucky enough to work in an environment that embraces that paradigm shift, Godspeed! I however, was not. After my son was born, my paternity leave was cut short and I lost my job.

But I did learn firsthand what I could have done differently, so hopefully those who work at parent-unfriendly companies can learn from my misfortune. Here are some steps you can take in negotiating your paternity leave.

Use Stats to Summon Up Your Courage

An unfortunate stigma exists for many fathers about asking for paternity leave. Horror stories like mine, paired with worries that they’ll be seen as less committed to their jobs, can make men feel like they’re rolling the dice by asking for time off for the birth of their child.

Advertisement

That said, the biggest mistake you can make is to not ask. This isn’t an emotional argument, but a rational one. Recent studies show that a lack of paid leave is not only detrimental to employees and their families, but their companies as well.

Two economists in California—one of the only states to adopt a paid family leave program—studied how leave affected state businesses. The hundreds of employers surveyed found that the leave had “minimal” impact on their business operations.

The benefits, on the other hand, proved startling. Most businesses found the program had either “positive” or “no noticeable effect” on productivity (89 percent), profitability/performance (91 percent), turnover (96 percent) and most critically, employee morale (99 percent).

Similar studies reported in a Think Progress report supply overwhelming evidence that paid family leave keeps workers happy, loyal and committed to staying in the workforce.

If you need further incentive, consider your baby’s development. New research from the Imperial College of London draws a link between increased paternal interaction during the first three months and improved cognitive performance in infants at 24 months.



The first few weeks of your baby’s life are impossible to get back once they’ve passed. Don’t let misplaced guilt—or a stubborn devotion to traditional masculinity—cost you timeless, irreplaceable memories. Regardless of what happened, I would never trade the time I had at home to get that job back.

Obtain a Written Copy of Your Company’s Policy

In my case, my company didn’t have a policy. I was told orally (and with a hug) that I’d get a paid month off and an additional month work from home, which struck me as generous. Out of gratitude, I never asked for that in writing. Big mistake.

Advertisement

After two weeks, I was told I had to return to the office at the end of the month. I protested, but didn’t have any documented proof of what had been discussed in my earlier meeting.

It may feel hyper-vigilant, but it’s far better to have everyone on the same page in writing from the jump, so there aren’t any surprises. That goes for both sides: a written policy not only gives employees proof of the agreement in case expectations change down the line, but it also creates a tangible document that helps the rest of the company prepare for your time away.

Know Your Legal Rights

We know that expectant parents are probably busy studying baby books and car seat specs, but it’s wise to read up on your state’s family leave laws, as well as the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), which entitles eligible employees to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave.

Advertisement

Do your research before you meet with your employer. Whether or not a parental leave policy exists at your company, you’ll know what you’re entitled to by law, and can use the information for your own leverage.

Take careful consideration of any language involving title and salary. When I returned to the office, I was told there had been a “restructuring of my department,” and was offered a downgrade in title with a dock in pay.

Advertisement

I was fortunate enough to find another opportunity quickly, but part of what upset me (beyond the obvious), was anger at myself for not understanding the law ahead of time. When the axe fell, I wish I’d known what the company could and couldn’t do within the confines of the law.

Proactive preparation is better than reflexive action, especially when you want to be focused on your newborn.

Speak With Other Fathers

It’s also valuable to chat up colleagues, along with friends at other companies, about their paternity leaves before meeting with your employer. Take notes about what you like about their arrangements, and what you’d rather avoid.

Advertisement

This will provide you with context on what other companies are doing and give you additional negotiating leverage. Casting a broad net of communication across industries may reveal novel approaches that your employer could be receptive to (spaced out parental leave, for example).

Again, if you make an individualized addendum to any existing policy, get the agreement in writing.

Initiate Your Coverage Plan

Don’t forget: your coworkers are going to be pulling extra weight to assuage your absence, so you should go beyond sending them a calendar reminder.

Advertisement

Show them you value their support by establishing a coverage plan shortly after you announce the news. After you’ve agreed with your employer on the acceptable amount of time off, call a meeting with everyone your absence will affect to go over the logistics of your plan.

Come prepared with concrete answers to start the meeting (Will your employer be hiring a temp to take on your responsibilities? Are there clients or customers who require advance notice? Is anyone else in the department out of the office during your paternity leave?) and ensure you give your colleagues time to ask their own questions. Circle back regularly with this group before your departure, so everyone feels comfortable and confident during the adjustment period.

Stick to the Script

Once you’re on leave, resist the temptation to check in or participate in anything work-related: that’s what the coverage plan is for.

Advertisement

Your baby will be sleeping a lot the first few weeks, but don’t fall into the trap of considering that downtime. If you’re not catching up on sleep yourself, fully immerse yourself in the other aspects of fatherhood: cleaning bottles, doing laundry, or reading about your baby’s first year.

If you cave and respond to what seems like even the most minute of emails, you’ve set a precedent that you’ll be available professionally during your paternity leave. That can snowball rapidly.



If you can’t bear to let your inbox be overrun, keep a personal list of items you want to address without responding to anything. Read it over before you return to the office. The important things will still be important, and you’ll be grateful you didn’t invest too much personal time in the superfluous stuff.