Here I am trying to show you how to draw cartoons. I will try to make as simple as possible. Drawing cartoons is very amusing. You will enjoy learning how to make figures. And maybe, you will also discover a new talent in yourself. This techniques can be applied on paper, but also in any digital photo editing program such as Photoshop.Author:

Step 1

Eager to start drawing a cartoon?

But FIRST, you should practice these lines....take a large page (newspapers are best for this practice), start drawing horizontal, vertical and diagonal lines. Draw some curves.

Go on practicing the lines. After this you wont find yourself with shaking hands while drawing the cartoons, and you will draw with confidence and firmness of the lines.

So build your foundation solidly.

Step 2

We will start with drawing the head. Most important thing to remember while drawing a cartoon head is the shape of the head. Here I am mentioning few important shapes.

1. Round head

2. Square head

3. Egg shaped

4. Pear shaped

5. Rectangle shaped

6. Glass shaped

So you can create complex cartoons from simple shapes.

Step 3

How to draw a cartoon head:

Some people think that cartoons are a way of getting out of drawing things right, but good cartoons are well drawn.

step 1. Draw the shape of the head. I am drawing circle. Add guidelines. This way you will get the anatomy right.

step 2. Draw the eyes.

step 3. nose

step 4. draw ears and mouth

step 5. Now add hair style

step 6. Not that one? May be this one?

Step 4

A face can be looking up or down or anywhere. Guidelines are very helpful to get the head facing in right direction. So first draw the head then put guidelines. Then add eyes, nose, mouth.............etc.

Guidelines are for your help only. So draw them very lightly. You can aways erase them once you are done.

Step 5

Facial expressions are an important channel of nonverbal communication. Emotions are expressed mainly through the eyebrows and mouth



for example

Anger is denoted by drawing the eyebrows in a V-shape low over the eyes. Ecstasy is shown by half closed eyes and a huge smile. To draw a scared cartoon expression make the eyes wide. for a surprised face draw big eyes and o-shaped mouth.



You can see some expressions drawn below.

Step 6

Here I have shown step by step process of drawing a cartoon head.

There are 3 heads, egg-shaped, pear-shaped and rectangle.

First draw the guidelines. Then you can draw eyes, lips, nose etc..........

Now make the outline of the head clearer and give it some hairstyle.

Step 7

Draw the movement of action for your cartoon. For this draw the guidelines.

Draw circles to get the shape of the body. Then draw the facial expressions and the body. After all this, draw the clothes and other accessories.

Step 8

Mouths is an important characteristic of a cartoon character. It changes the expressions.

You can always draw a mouth using a line or a circle.

Just try different style .Once you found the one that you like the most, practice and practice again until you get it done.

Here are some examples.

Step 9

A person's thoughts can be ascertained by looking in his or her eyes.The eyes are simply the most expressive part of funny cartoon faces, and almost every emotion can be shown through the proper illustration of eyes.

Here I have tried to capture a few expressions.

Step 10

Hands



First draw a circle, second step is add the thumb and then add fingers....Erase extra lines

Step 11

These hands are drawn with the same process described above...Its easy....just keep practicing .

Step 12

Using these simple steps, you can create your own cartoons.....