Here it is: over TWO MONTHS’ WORTH of daily Whole30 recipes—complete with tips, tricks, and encouragement to get you through an entire Whole30 (and more)!

Below, you’ll find a set of links to each of the daily Whole30-friendly recipes I posted throughout two separate January Whole30s. Bookmark this post, ’cause I’ll be updating it with all of my Whole30 roundups in the future (or follow my Whole30 Pinterest board); then, when you’re stumped for meal ideas, come back for inspiration.

Of course, this isn’t meant to be an exhaustive list of my Whole30 recipes. Head over to my free Recipe Index for the complete rundown of the Whole30 recipes on my site.

Book-lovin’ Whole30 eaters should also pick up a copy of my New York Times bestselling cookbook, Nom Nom Paleo: Food for Humans, and my follow-up recipe book, Ready or Not! Both are packed with new and classic recipes—many of which can’t be found anywhere else. Plus, the vast majority of them are Whole30-compliant! Here’s a downloadable list of the 100+ Whole30 recipes in my first book, and here’s the Recipe Index in my second book, which identifies the 120+ Whole30 friendly dishes contained in its pages.

And if you have an iPhone or iPad, go download my Webby Award-winning app! With over 100 Whole30-approved recipes, interactive guides, a customizable shopping list, fully-emailable recipes, and a 30-day Whole30 meal plan, this app is an invaluable tool for Paleo foodies and culinary newbies alike. There’s even a dedicated Whole30 recipe category in the app!

Now: onto my day-by-day guide to 30 days of Whole30 recipes!

30-DAY WHOLE30 ROUNDUP #1:

What? Looking for another 30 days of Whole30 recipes? Well, you’re in luck!

30-DAY WHOLE30 ROUNDUP #2:

Still not satisfied? (Sheesh!) Here are a few more ideas:

Check out another of my previous Whole30 experiences here.

Slurp up some Whole30-friendly soups here.

Learn all about lunches you can pack during your Whole30 here.

And if you ever find yourself in a rut, head over to my Whole30 Inspiration post, which includes even more of my recipes.

And when you’re all done? Don’t fret, ’cause resources abound:

First, head on over to Whole30 to gobble up their wrap-up post, including links to articles about living (and eating!) in the days, weeks, and years post-Whole30. Buy a copy of the Whole30 book and the Whole30 Cookbook (which includes a bunch of exclusive recipes by me!). And if you have a copy of “It Starts With Food” on your bookshelf, take another look at Chapter 20 (“Strategies for Long-Term Success”), or grab a copy of Food Freedom Forever, which teaches strategies for making this new approach to food a sustainable change.

Next, check out my gal Holly’s post about the process of reintroducing foods after completing a Whole30. As she reminds us, it’s important not to just go crazy on Day 31. Instead, “[e]xperiment with foods you miss, but do it in a way that will actually help you gather more information.”

Lastly, HAVE FUN. I believe strongly that the lifestyle changes that really “stick” are the ones that are fun and exciting. Continue to foster your culinary curiosity, and play around in the kitchen. Not only will you eat healthier, but you’ll develop skills and gain knowledge that’ll make you even more awesome than you are right now (as if that’s even possible).

How did your Whole30 go? How do you feel? And what are your post-Whole30 plans?

Looking for more recipe ideas? Head on over to my Recipe Index. You’ll also find exclusive recipes on my iPhone and iPad app, and in my cookbooks, Nom Nom Paleo: Food for Humans (Andrews McMeel Publishing 2013) and Ready or Not! (Andrews McMeel Publishing 2017)