Photo

Like most people I know, I spent much of the autumn . . . sick. Sick with the sort of mild but hydra-headed illness that in me, and in other people of general good health, eventually beats its own retreat. I carried on — stoically, I hope — gripped by a deep desire, same as everyone’s, to “get well soon.”

Patience, of course, is the best option. Beyond that, there are the myriad pharmaceutically formulated syrups and pills that relieve symptoms, often effectively. But no matter the aspirin or ephedrine content, none of these can counteract the flattening of the spirit and deadening of joy in which illness results. For this, I depend on a different means, one that is completely in my control: making meals I trust to hasten healing. (I am content to let the question of why they help remain a mystery; what matters is how I can feed and eat a path back to wellness.)

I like to turn to the tales of Old Wives, whose wisdom can be roughly ordered into: palliatives, therapeutics, restoratives and (for trying to stave off the next bout) preventives. A version of the soft, bland pastina my mother served me is a typical palliative. Other calming, classic examples are toasted bread, topped with sugar and soaked liberally in warm milk; any light and creamy bread or rice pudding; hot milk and honey, with or without whiskey (with!); and chicken broth. The last, I’m told, has been medically “proven” to help, though ask any child, and she’ll tell you it was proven at her first congested sip. Go east, and grandmothers will treat you with ginger and miso, kimchi and fermented teas.

I lay bets, too, with the let-the-devils-duke-it-outers, who use pungent foods to vanquish the demon illness inside. A chef friend takes a can of Campbell’s tomato soup, presses four garlic cloves into it and eats it very hot. Straight vinegar and whole raw onions or garlic also have devotees. Then there is the following — long, specific and offering some deliverance — sent to me recently by a very spiritual art dealer: “It’s got to be soup, with whole cloves of garlic, onions, chicken stock. Heat is important, and wanting to sweat like with vindaloo but easier on the digestion. Asian hot sauce and two free range eggs, which I poach in the brew. Then hope springs eternal.” Another friend advises: honey and garlic together. How? I forget, but I can see it working and being, in its way, good.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Cooking Newsletter Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Strangely useful, too, is the mystical ancient theory that the body is composed of four humors. A terrifying book on the Black Death (which humoral theory could not, alas, relieve) provides a ready summary: blood was “hot and moist, like air,” while phlegm was “cold and moist, like water”; yellow bile was “hot and dry, like fire,” and black bile “cold and dry, like earth.” When sick, you ate dry to combat moisture, moist to fight internal aridity. I neither believe nor disbelieve, but perceive a truth: What is curative for one person may not be for another with identical symptoms.