About Salzburg Cathedral: The Salzburg Cathedral (Dom) is by far the biggest church in Old Town, faces 3 town squares at once, and is where Mozart was baptized. The original Christian parish on the grounds was completed by Saint Virgil (Bishop from 767-84) and was about half the size of the current Cathedral. This first parish was consecrated on September 24th, 774 when the remains of Saint Rupert were moved here and an annual festival still marks the day. Saint Rupert was the Bishop of Worms who came here in 696 to establish a new center to spread Christianity in the region. Rupert spent the next 20 years building churches and a convent in what remained from the then sparsely occupied Roman town of Juvavum which once filled all of today’s Old Town. While Saint Rupert’s work is considered the founding of modern town, the name Salzburg wasn’t used until after Bishop Virgil (from Ireland) took over the church building work of his predecessors and was in honor of the ancient fort that was on the site of Nonnberg Abbey.

Bishop Virgil’s parish was subject many fires and expansions over the centuries and grew into a large complex including a choir, clergy house, a crypt, and cemetery. After a 10 year rebuild from a fire in 1167, the Virgil Dom become the mightiest Romanesque Cathedral North of the Alps. Another huge fire in 1598 led to church’s 8th re-build and the magnificent Baroque style Salzburg Cathedral you see today. The new cathedral was planned by Archbishop Wolf Dietrich Raitenau who was already in the midst of revamping the neighboring Residenz Palace and new square with help from an Italian architect. Some say he may have even been involved in the fire as an excuse to clear more room for his other building projects. Although he was anti-Protestant, Bishop Raitenau was expelled by Bavarian forces and imprisoned for life after refusing to join the Reformation’s Catholic League. The next Bishop was both a relative and nemesis of Raitenau, but also stayed out of the Catholic League and laid the cornerstone for the Cathedral in 1614 (opened 1628). It is a miracle that the new Salzburg Cathedral was built at all as most of Austria got swept up in Europe’s Catholic versus Protestant 30 Years’ War during the construction. While other cities were in the middle of this turmoil, Salzburg was able to rely on its rich salt production to have enough money to remain independent from the War. Because of their independence, Salzburg was able to build this massive Church while most other cities had to scale back on their building projects.

Before entering the Salzburg Cathedral it is hard to miss the beautiful Virgin Mary (Madonna) Statue in Dom Square in front of the doors. While it appears odd that the Mary statue is looking away from the church, further inspection reviles that the statue is actually interacting with the Church’s facade. The two angels on the front of the Church are holding a crown and as you walk closer their relation to the Mary Statue give the appearance that they are actually placing the crown on her head. Moving closer to the Cathedral’s entrance you’ll notice large scene with the Statues of Four Saints (1600s) and three towering bronze gates (1900s). The 4 statues are of Saint Rupert holding a salt barrel, Saint Virgil with a church, Saint Peter with keys, and Saint Paul holding a sword. Statues of apostles as well as Moses and Elijah are further up the facade. The three gates are made to represent the Three Virtues (Göttliche Tugenden) and go from left to right: The Gate of Faith (Tor des Glaubens) the Gate of Love (Tor der Liebe), and the Gate of Hope (Tor der Hoffnung).

Inside the entrance look for the bronze baptismal font (1311) with lion statues (1200) where Mozart was baptized. The most impressive part of the interior is the huge 233 foot tall dome which is painted into two eight piece sections depicting scenes from the Old Testament to go with murals of Passion of the Christ along the nave. During WWII a bomb crashed right through the dome, but luckily didn’t explode. Also awaiting the curious traveler is the working organ from 1703 that Mozart played during two years as the Church’s organist, an old tomb filled crypt with exposed pieces of the old Romanesques foundations from both 774 and 1167, plus an interesting Cathedral museum (website) covering 1300 years of history. While the modern 4,000-pipe organs impressive, the 7 huge tower bells (2 from the 1600s) are a real treat. The group of bells is considered the finest sounding in Austria and among them, the Salvator Bell, is the second largest in Austria weighing 14 tons.

Hours: Monday-Saturday 8am-6pm & Sundays 1pm-6pm; Summer months open until 7pm; Winter Mondays closes at 5pm. Cost: Free, however donations requested. Mass: Sunday 10am. Organ Performance: June-Sept Wed & Sat 11:15am for one hour. Museum Hours: Wednesday-Monday 10am-5pm (last entrance 4pm, closed Tuesdays); Open daily in December; July & August also open daily until 8pm. Museum Cost: Adults 10€, Kids Free.