Recently Twitter rolled out their native analytics platform for all users and now you can get some quality data about your tweets directly from Twitter.

After researching over a thousand Twitter Tools for the Twitter Tools Book I came across many Twitter analytics and visualization tools. These Twitter tools were designed to add value by presenting a different way to visualize or analyze your tweets, the people in your network, and the tweets from the people in your network.

Many tools tried to add value and failed. At least they tried.

The following tools, however, stand out in my mind as exceptional or entertaining and I recommend you check them out if you want to analyze and visualize your activity on Twitter.



1. TweepsMap

TweepsMap is an excellent Twitter tool for both analyzing and visualizing your Twitter network.

As it’s name suggests it does this by showing you how your followers are distributed on a map, in terms of percentages.

You can see the distribution of my followers below. Clearly most of my followers are in the USA and Canada, however it is cool to know where my followers are all over the globe.

This follower data can also be viewed at the province/state, as seen below, or even at the city level.

TweepsMap also provides other awesome analytics options, such as the ability to view inactive people you follow who have not tweeted within three or six months.

Here are a few of the other powerful features of Tweepsmap.

Mapping followers world-wide, interactively and to a city level. Discover followers and influencers by location so you can design campaigns accordingly.

Intelligent publishing. Straightforward publishing based on followers interests at that moment, Best time to Tweet (by region), Tweet scheduler and more.

Analyze Influencers and competitors. Comprehensive analysis of any account (including competitors).

The best time to tweet. This new Tweepsmap feature shows you the best time to tweet based on when your followers are online, and also based on the best amplification potential for your tweets (the followers of your followers).

Schedule tweets to automatically send at the best time. Schedule any day number of tweets, any day in the future, define repeat frequency (if at all), edit when required – and Tweepsmap will automatically pick up up the time of the day (based on your best times to tweet profile).

Growth/decline by region: absolute number, as well as delta on daily, weekly, monthly, or customized by campaigns dates.

Measure impact and reach so you can gauge the effectiveness of your campaign.

Unique. In-depth analytics and engagement.

There are too many other awesome features of TweepsMap to describe at length here but I will be doing a full review of this Twitter tool in the near future so stay tuned for that, and in the mean time check them out!

2. Audiense (Formerly SocialBro)

Audiense is a powerful platform that enables you to analyze and visualize your network in a variety of ways.

In addition to analysis Audiense also enables you to grow your network and schedule tweets for Hootsuite or Buffer directly within their platform.

Some of their other features include:

Explore Your Twitter Community

Determine the Best Time to Tweet

Identify Influencers

Target Your Audience with Precision

Discover and Easily Follow Targeted Twitter Users

…and more!

3. Keyhole

Keyhole is a Twitter Analytics tool that enables you to tap into Instagram data as well.

With Keyhole you can track hashtags, influencers, high impact data, and more.

4. Twitonomy

Twitonomy is a powerful Twitter anayltics platform that I discovered after it’s founder @MattFyot reached out to me on Twitter.

This free service is actually very robust, and I am impressed with all of the different methods of analysis it offers.

To give you a better idea here is a screen capture of my Twitonomy profile:

5. Twenty Feet

Twenty Feet is a powerful analytics platform that tracks and graphs stats like Twitter mentions, followers, retweets, and more.

Twenty feet also integrates with other services like Facebook, bitly, Google Analytics, YouTube, and more.

You can track your Twitter and Facebook with Twenty Feet for free, and if you want to track other services beyond these they have paid packages as well and offer a free 30 day trial.

6. Twitter Counter

Twitter Counter is a way to visualize and track the growth of your own followers, and even compare your growth to the growth of other users.

Below is a graph they generated showing my follower growth during the last month.

7. Visible Tweets

Visible Tweets is a way to view tweets based on keyword or username.

This Twitter visualization Tool is basically a screen saver featuring your tweets.

Here is a video I recorded with a quick demo of this tool.

8. Tweetstats

Tweetstats is, you guessed it, statistics for Twitter. And robust statistics at that. Check this tool out for a glimpse into your tweeting style and tendancies.

9. Twistori

Twistori is an elegant way to view a scrolling stream of tweet containing the emotive words: I love, I hate, I think, I believe, I feel, and I wish.

This is a pretty interesting way to get a feel for the pulse of Twitter.

10. Tweepsmap

TweepsMap is a cool tool that shows you where your followers are in the world.

With this tool you can map the effectiveness and distribution of your following.

Below you can see a screen capture of the map TweepsMap generated of my following, which has the greatest concentration in the US and Canada, but is also widely distributed throughout the world.

Bonus Analysis Tools

MentionMap

MentionMap is a cool network exploring tool. The interactive nature of this tool is very neat, although sometimes awkward to navigate. Test it out for yourself with the embed below.

Portwiture

Portwiture is definitely one of the more unique visual Twitter apps that you’ll find. Rather than tag clouds or graphs, Portwiture allows you to visualize your tweets in photographs.

Foller.me

Foller.me is a cool free Twitter analytics tool that enables you to quickly analyze important stats about any Twitter user.

My favorite features of this tool are the topics, hashtags, and mentions analysis.

Other cool features of foller.me include the times of day you usually tweet, the breakdown of your last 100 tweets and more!

Tweet Archivist

Tweet Archivist was built by Mix Online, an opinionated group of designers and developers at Microsoft.



Some of the cool features of this tool include:

Top Users

Top Words

Top URLs

Tweet vs. Retweet Ratio

Sources (Tools) Tweets are sent with

My Favorite Twitter Tool

The Twitter analytics tool TweepsMap is a major reason why I have been able to get consistently great results on Twitter.

Using this tool I am more aware than ever about where my network is from and what is going on inside of it.

Check it out to get a better idea of how it can work for you.

Feedback

How do you analyze and visualize your tweets and Twitter presence? Let us know in the comments below!

Free 7 Day Twitter eCourse

Sign up FREE for our powerful 7 day Twitter Tips and Twitter Tools eCourse at: TweetResults.com