Major League Baseball will always be the main reason that Major League Baseball cannot embrace change. The modern rules of the game took shape by 1903, once the foul-strike rule finally went into effect in the American League; before that, skilled batters could foul off pitches endlessly without any repercussions. But competition among differing versions of the sport continued until 1915, when the struggling Federal League sued the American and National Leagues under monopoly laws, leading to a series of appeals that ended in 1922, when the Supreme Court validated baseball’s antitrust exemption and allowed the National and American Leagues to operate as a monopoly.

Without competition, those leagues’ brand of baseball became the sclerotic and self-important product played today. Even the designated hitter — according to popular lore, the brainchild of Charlie O. Finley, the quirky and forward-thinking owner of the Oakland A’s in the 1970s — had been debated since 1891, when William Chase Temple, the president of the Pittsburgh Pirates, brought it up for a vote before the 1892 season.

In those bygone days, competition among leagues fostered change, especially when it came to the interminable length of games. Baseball’s antitrust exemption has certainly ensured its financial health, but at the expense of enabling variations of the game to push it in new directions.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The N.F.L. has always felt free to cherry-pick elements from upstart competitors, like the A.F.L., the XFL, Canadian football or arena football. Professional basketball evolved through barnstorming teams, the rivalry between the A.B.A. and the N.B.A. and the growth of international basketball, with its modified rules. Had it aged in the same manner as baseball, there would be no 3-point line — stiffs would be laying it up in the paint over and over again — or annual dunk contest. Modern baseball has had almost none of that sort of diversity to borrow from: Japan, Korea, Latin America and the minor leagues all play essentially the same game. And while there’s no reason for the sport to change just for change’s sake, there’s also no need to cut off any possible progress by hiding behind an antitrust exemption that has long since outlived its usefulness. Let 100 half-cooked, weird baseball leagues bloom.

Consider that the 1857 gathering at Smith’s took place during baseball’s first culture war, one that pitted, predictably enough, Massachusetts against New York. Men in both regions — women would start their own clubs less than a couple of decades later — played a game called base ball that involved a thrown ball, a bat and bases, but the rules varied wildly and changed constantly. The Massachusetts game featured one-out innings and overhand pitching, and batters could be called out by being hit by a thrown ball while between bases. Typically, the first team to score 100 runs won. The New York game was a bit more genteel and pragmatic: Games were played to 21, not 100; pitchers had to throw underhand; no players had balls intentionally thrown at them; and games concluded before dark.

Photo

The debates over which version was better centered on manliness, decorum and the pace of play. The Massachusetts crowd argued that it was manlier for outs to require some measure of physical pain, while the New Yorkers said that manliness could never be extricated from gentlemanly manners and that only savages ran around fields pegging balls at one another.

The historians who study baseball’s early days have been unable to figure out why the New York version triumphed — John Thorn, the official historian of Major League Baseball, attributes it in part to an extended lobbying campaign that asked men if they truly wanted to be savages throwing balls at one another — but as the professional leagues consolidated over the next 20 or so years, the original rules of the Knickerbocker Club were adjusted: Hits caught on one bounce were no longer considered outs; the number of balls it took to be awarded a walk went from nine to four; pitches hit out of the park went from fouls to home runs.

“The 19th century provided a lot of experimentation,” Thorn told me. “Baseball isn’t linear — it’s more an evolutionary bramble bush where you have twisting and turning and circling back, and it’s hard to see where one thing begins and one ends. The history of the game proceeded through intelligence, but also through inadvertence.”

It’s not clear that early baseball’s pioneers picked the right version of base ball. In his duties as official historian, Thorn has played in re-enactments of both the old New York game and the old Massachusetts game. “To be completely honest,” he said, a bit resignedly, “the Massachusetts game was a lot more fun.”