The point? If you want to race fast, you have to not only train your body to get fitter, but also train yourself to endure the pain of racing. Certain workouts are particularly good for developing this ability.

Frog in Hot Water

Progression workouts ramp up the discomfort bit by bit, so that by the end you're enduring pain that would have seemed intolerable at the start. The gradual tightening of the screws gives both your body and your mind a chance to warm up so that you can push harder–and suffer more–than if you'd dived into the deep end right away. A progression run may last 20 minutes or two hours, starts at a comfortable pace, and accelerates in regular increments until you're running faster than tempo pace.

Suffer it: In place of a regular tempo run, try a 10-mile progression run with the last two miles about 10 seconds per mile faster than half marathon pace. Choose your starting pace based on getting 15 seconds faster every mile for the first eight miles, then hanging on for dear life for the last two. For example, if your half marathon pace is 6:30 per mile, start at 8:20 per mile and finish at 6:20.

Shock Intervals

With experience, we learn to ration our energy throughout a workout. That's a good skill to have, but it can become self-limiting if you never break out of that shell. Once every few months, try a workout that involves pushing into deep pain early in the workout–and then regrouping and running more intervals.

Suffer it: Run 8 to 10 × 600 meters with 90 seconds recovery, aiming for 5K pace. The catch: Run the fourth repeat as hard as you can. Pretend it's the end of the workout (this is not easy–you really have to focus on the self-deception). Then resume as if nothing had happened–no extra rest, no missed repeats. Don't worry too much about the pace, which will slow significantly; the point is to practice continuing to push when you're hurting.

Turn up the Volume

One of the key strategies runners use to handle pain is breaking a race into smaller chunks. It's easier to focus on finishing the next mile than on making it all the way to the finish. The problem with the marathon is that it's so darn long. The pain-handling technique starts to break down if you have to repeat it 26 times, so you need to practice.

Suffer it: Run 26 × 200 meters, or if you prefer to work out on trails or roads, 26 × 45 seconds. (Jog for 100 meters for 45 seconds) between repeats. Aim for 5K pace, or slightly faster if you can maintain it. As the workout goes on, try not to let your focus and motivation flag: You should care just as much about the 22nd repeat as you did about the second. If you're racing shorter distances like the 10K or half marathon, aim for 15 to 20 reps.