In 2002, in an article called “ The Televisionary ,” Malcolm Gladwell told the story of the invention of television. The visionary in question was a man named Philo T. Farnsworth. Farnsworth was born in 1906 and grew up working his family’s potato farm; in 1927, he built one of the first working television cameras. For decades, he was widely known as the inventor of television. The truth was that television was an incredibly complex technology; hundreds, even thousands, of engineers had contributed to perfecting it. “Everyone was working on television and everyone was reading everyone else’s patent applications,” Gladwell wrote. By the time TV became a commercial reality, in the late thirties, its many inventors had learned to accept that no one person could claim to have created it—that, as Gladwell put it, “the machine was larger than they were.”

That turned out to be true for the rest of us, too. For nearly a century, television, like the weather, has shaped our behaviors, our moods, and our desires in ways we don’t always comprehend. The New Yorker , which was founded in 1925, was there from the beginning, covering television from its invention onward. In March of 1928, James Thurber visited Bell Labs, on West Street, to see an early tech demo. “The television demonstration properly awed us,” Thurber wrote. “The lights went out, there was the whirring of a machine, then a long flurry of black and white patterns. . . . Finally these steadied into a picture of a card with the Bell trade mark on it.” At the other end of the auditorium, someone stood before the “sending machine,” blowing smoke rings.

A few years later, in May of 1931, a reporter named Morris Markey returned to Bell Labs for what we would now call a videoconference. Told that he would be meeting “Mr. Sullivan,” he walked into a dark room, where a man appeared on a television screen. “Perhaps I had better explain that I am about three miles from you now,” he said, “and that I can see you quite as clearly as you see me.” Five years later, in 1936, E. B. White went to the R.C.A. Building to see the newest developments. He watched a comedian and a political speech—and then, on the TV screen, saw a picture of another TV screen. “Try and appreciate our situation,” he wrote. “We were in a dark room looking into a television set at a television set which was showing a picture of a moving picture.” “Staggered” by this early moment of meta, White fled to the sixty-fifth-floor observation deck, where he could gaze at Staten Island in the traditional way.

No one knew quite how, but it was clear that television was going to change the world. In 1938, two Talk of the Town reporters consulted a TV engineer, hoping to master the lingo in advance. The engineer explained that people who watched television would be called “lookers-in,” asking one another, “Did you look in last night?” They would comfortably distinguish between “live” shows and “dead” ones, which had been prerecorded; they would know strange words such as “audio” and “video” and understand the new meanings of “ghost” and “noise.” (TV “kits” were expensive: the reporters noted that the term “small down payment” would retain its usual meaning.)

Around the same time, the magazine noted a series of televisual firsts. In April of 1939, Talk of the Town covered the first surgical telecast, which was staged at a Brooklyn hospital and allowed spectators in one building to watch an operation in another. That May, at the New York World’s Fair, ordinary citizens got their first glimpse of television. That same month also saw the first televised sporting event in the United States—a double-header baseball game between Columbia and Princeton at Columbia’s Baker Field. Even though viewers could see the action for themselves, the soon-to-be-legendary sportscaster Bill Stern called the game as though he were on the radio, and discrepancies between his narration and reality were newly obvious: “He had a fellow coming up to the plate when he was already there,” the reporters wrote, “and a ball going through a first baseman’s legs when it had caromed off his glove to one side.”

The Second World War put the ascent of TV on pause, and, for the most part, The New Yorker turned its attention elsewhere. In 1947, however, for a piece called “ Diary of a Viewer ,” Robert Rice spent a few evenings “in the bosom of a typical American set-owning family.” (“My object is to learn what it’s like to live with that new branch of entertainment which its trade press persists in calling the Video Art,” he wrote.) At the time, there were fewer than seven thousand television sets in all of Manhattan, and an evening in front of the television felt exotic. Over the course of a week, Rice watched a game show called “Cash & Carry,” a production of “Twelfth Night,” a cooking program sponsored by an appliance company, and a baseball game (Dodgers vs. Phillies). During the game, he got a preview of a behavior that was soon to be widespread—a family shouting at the television while eating too much junk food.

Over the next decade, television programming came to assume the familiar shape it has today. In 1950, Thomas Whiteside visited the offices of the ad agency Batten, Barton, Durstine & Osborne, which made cutting-edge television commercials for Lucky Strike cigarettes, among other products. (B.B.D.O. became the inspiration for Sterling Cooper, in “Mad Men.”) For a 1952 piece called “ No Lobster Men from Neptune ,” he attended the filming of the wildly successful “Tom Corbett, Space Cadet,” observing an early writers’ room in action. And, in 1954, he profiled Sylvester (Pat) Weaver, the new president of NBC (and the father of Sigourney Weaver). Weaver helped create the “Today” and “Tonight” shows, launched a number of educational programs, and brought “magazine-style” advertising to television: instead of producing each show in collaboration with a sponsoring client, NBC began producing its own shows, then selling short commercials, which aired during the breaks, to different clients.

By the end of the fifties, The New Yorker was writing about popular television shows that we still remember today: “ Sunrise Semester ,” “ Continental Classroom ,” and “ Car 54, Where Are You? ” In a dedicated TV column, run under the rubrics “Television” and “The Air,” the magazine’s early TV critics, John Lardner and Philip Hamburger, reviewed shows such as “Gunsmoke,” “Perry Mason,” and “Candid Camera.” Hamburger called “Candid Camera” “sadistic, poisonous, anti-human, and sneaky.” Lardner admired “Gunsmoke” but resisted its “literary ingenuity.” “Gunsmoke” was what we might now call a “prestige” Western, and Lardner yearned for the old-fashioned kind, “with its austere pattern of men, horses, chase, and fusillade.”