As it turns out, Dicke doesn't need to fit "quarantine" on a single line after all. That night, the San Francisco Giants win the World Series, thanks to a performance by pitcher Madison Bumgarner so dominant that Tom Jolly decides to swap in that story and moves Ebola to an inside page with a wider berth for a headline. But Dicke has other problems and stares at his plus-size computer monitor, which is flipped 90 degrees so that he can see the digital page as if it were a newspaper in his hands. Every article on every page appears highlighted in blocks of green, yellow, and red, signifying varying stages of completion and, thus, increasing levels of threat to Dicke's deadline. Elsewhere on the front page he changes the lead of one story because it's too long, then moves to another about how politics in Louisiana is becoming less eccentric. The starter headline reads, "Draining Color From Politics in Louisiana," which Dicke doesn't care for. "It's not a very exciting headline, but it is sort of the point of the story," he says, copying and pasting the text into a blank document. "I'm gonna see if I can do any better." Five minutes later, out comes "Colorful Rogues Make Way for National Issues."

Dicke meets his first deadline—barely—but 9 p.m. is only the beginning. Deadline for the first local edition is 10:45, followed by another at midnight, and a final call half an hour later. When Dicke finally packs up to leave just after 12:30 a.m., Lillie Dremeaux is still plotting out the next morning's home page and preparing to hand overnight duties to an editor in Hong Kong. In a previous era, after the last page was sent to the printer, an editor would ring a bell, walk toward the door, and holler "Good night!" to mostly no one, because there was no one left to yell at. Dicke looks around at colleagues midshift, their eyes pinned to computer screens.

"We no longer do that," he says.

2:55 A.M. A SATURDAY

Will Steacy

Smith and Gordon load their minivan and deliver all 233 papers in about ninety minutes

Natasha Smith and Michael Gordon park on a cobblestone street on the Brooklyn waterfront as they do every morning. Theirs is one of dozens of cars lining both sides of the street. They stand with a group of thirty or forty other deliverymen and women inside a loading dock waiting for one of Ernie Booth's eighty trucks to arrive. The Sunset Park Depot, as this cement room the size of a high school gym is known, is one of forty Times delivery centers throughout the New York area, and on this night it is responsible for the safe deposit of 12,559 copies across 215 different paper routes around the borough. Two hundred and thirty-three of those papers are the responsibility of Smith and Gordon, a husband-and-wife team that has driven a pair of routes together for the past three years. When the truck arrives at 3 a.m., the couple load five bundles of fifty papers each into a shopping cart and dump them onto one of the many wooden tables in the room, where they combine the front and inside sections. Smith tosses one copy aside after spotting a rip, and watches out for missing sections—"I can tell just from the weight"—which could result in a complaint on the report card every carrier receives each morning. (They get paid 50 cents per paper.) Smith and Gordon shove each completed paper into a blue plastic bag and toss it into a pair of shopping carts. Deliverers are allowed to show up anytime—Smith and Gordon arrive early, because late arrivals often get stuck with damaged copies—so long as they deliver their papers by 6:30 on weekdays and 8:30 on weekends. (In the suburbs, where commuters leave earlier, the weekday goal is 5:30.) The busiest hour in the depot is around 4 a.m., and by 5:30 all the papers have been removed and the door is shut, leaving a lone worker to fill a shopping cart with the damaged and discarded copies left behind.

Smith and Gordon load their minivan and deliver all 233 papers in about ninety minutes. "Nothing like the cold to make you do it faster," says Smith, who's wearing a leopard-skin sweater and navy-blue beanie. On some blocks she and Gordon walk opposite sides of a street, tossing papers onto stoops, while on others they split up—Gordon carries an Ikea bag stuffed with papers as he walks down blocks with a high density of subscribers, while Smith drives sparser streets nearby. The longest stop is the five minutes it takes Smith to deliver six papers to individual apartments in a nursing home. One customer has asked her to hit his door with the paper so he knows it has arrived. Another customer's dog waits on the step and barks when the paper lands. At this moment, hundreds of thousands of copies of The New York Times are flying out of people's hands, a little action that starts a simultaneous morning ritual: A newspaper lands with a soft thud, and eventually someone opens the door and picks it up, reads it, and knows what is happening in the world.