Year of Monkey - 2016 Chinese Horoscope for Chinese Zodiac Tiger For people born in Tiger years: 1914, 1926, 1938, 1950, 1962, 1974, 1986, 1998, 2010

Valentine's Day Fast Love Match

Donald Trump for US President Chinese Horoscope

If your birthday is before February 4, then your astrological sign is Cow, not Tiger. (Verify Your Sign)

Tiger is connected to the tree in the early spring, which is still cold. Monkey is connected to the wind in the fall. The wind in the fall is strong, dry and unpredictable. When wind is strong, it will hurt the leave of the tree. So Monkey could bring the pressure on Tiger. Tiger is never afraid of Monkey. But the current timing is unfavorable to Tiger. Tiger should calm down to avoid the fighting with Monkey.

According to Chinese horoscopes, Tiger contains mainly Wood; Monkey contains mainly Metal and some Water. Since Wood can be cut by Metal, Monkey has some advantages over Tiger. The reason is Monkey is smarter. Monkey contains Water, which is related to wisdom. Therefore, Tiger needs to learn something from Water. Water can grow tree. Water to Tiger is education, knowledge and professional skills. If Tiger is intelligent and outsmart Monkey, then Monkey will yield its territory for Tiger. That implies Tiger owns the power in an organization.

Chinese Zodiac Tiger vs. 2016 Year of Monkey

2016 is the Year of Red Monkey. You were born in the Year of Tiger. The following is the Red Monkey year prediction for people born in year of Tiger.

Tiger must be smarter than Monkey to become a king.

Career: You will face the challenge and trouble in your career. It's required to use your experience, knowledge and wisdom to solve the problems. If you don't have the solution, then you have to ask and learn from someone else.

Job Change: If a company offers you a job, then you shouldn't take it. It's not the time to make change. Otherwise, many unexpected problems in the new position are waiting for you to solve. And you don't have that solutions now.

Wealth: The money luck doesn't look good. People are watching for the money in your pocket. Don't be greedy for big return and risky business. All investments must switch to conservative items.

Love: There is a disagreement sign in the love relationship. You need to calm and play low profile when the argument is there. If you have trouble in the communication with your lover, then ask the elder friend as the mediator or liaison.

Social Circle: You don't have good mood for social events. But you can attend the educational networks. You can learn new knowledge and meet new friends there.

Quarrel: If you have argument or lawsuit with someone, then you need the negotiation to stop the dispute. The sign shows the result of the dispute is unfavorable to you.

Health: You need to pay attention on the accident. Your arms and legs might get hurt. Also, take care of your liver and the nervous system.

General Fortune: Your fortune won't be the same as before. You need to learn new professional skills to increase your career opportunities.

More predictions below...

2016 Master Tsai Five Elements Astrology

2017 Chicken Year Chinese Horoscopes For Tiger

MORE 2016 Year of Monkey Predictions

If you provide your birthday and birth time, then we can analyze your Chinese Astrology Birth Chart before giving you predictions for free.

2016 Five Element Chinese Astrology Prediction

2016 Prediction of Day Master vs. Monkey Year

Don't miss the treasure here! Do not leave this website with empty hands! Master Tsai reveals your Chinese Astrology secret codes for free.

Your Rise and Fall Chart of Entire Life

Free Daily Chinese Astrology



2016 Chinese Horoscopes for all 12 animals

The Legend of 12 Chinese Zodiac Signs

Master Tsai Chinese Astrology

Home of Chinese Fortune Calendar