Bettering yourself as an artist takes time and effort. There are no shortcuts. However, there are some tips and tricks that can help you along the way. This advice is from artists who are working in the industry, so they know exactly what they’re talking about, and today they’ll be sharing their knowledge with you. We’ll be talking about things like diversity and originality, the ideas behind your work and ways in which you can get the idea out of your head and down on paper. Whether you are a seasoned professional or a hobbyist, there is something you can learn here.

1. Distributing Detail in a Design

Discipline yourself with how you distribute detail in a design. Learning how to draw or create details for an illustration is not as hard as learning how to control where those details go and where they don’t. I find it ironic that when I design, it takes more time and effort to avoid drawing details than it does to draw them. At the end of a design creation, I find that I am far more proud of the huge simple shapes that are not cluttered. These are places and shapes that I call “sacred areas”. These places were hard earned. If they were designed well, these more simple shapes tend to command a lot of attention, and give strength to the illustration.

As I start a new design and I am in a rough stage, I will identify “sacred areas” as early as I can. These should remain clean from the intense energy that details tend to cause. As I continue to design the drawing, I will try to discipline myself to avoid encroaching with details on those huge “areas of rest”. Once I have identified those early parameters, I find that it’s totally fine to add more and more detail to places that are already heavy with details.

There are many times when I find that it is good to encroach onto the “sacred areas” with some few smartly added details. These additions are the most difficult and time consuming additions to make because they need to be added very thoughtfully – in particular, these details require the most tactics and strategy on your part as a designer. Ideally, the details that encroach on the areas of rest will leave the overall shape visually clean. The simplicity of these areas should not be lost.

Just because we were avoiding the addition of details in many places does not mean that details were not important. When you finalize a design, if you have followed this strategy properly, you will find that the large simple shapes are powerful specifically because of the details that also exist in the piece. The concentrations of detail can perform the function of supporting the larger simple shapes, and give those large simple shapes even more authority than they otherwise would have had. This is the goal.

– Toph Gorham, Art Director at Gameloft

2. Speed Means Nothing If It Does Not Look Good

I’ve noticed a trend lately where everybody is concerned about how quickly they can do something. My best tip would be to stop worrying about how long it takes and think about how you’re going to make it good instead. Start thinking about the design and why something is there as opposed to throwing photos at it. There is nothing wrong with photobashing but it’s important to think about the shape and design before you bring in photos. I see a lot of artists who are using photos as a crutch or as a Hail Mary, hoping to find a design. While this can yield results at times, it isn’t a reliable way to design. What you wanna do is come up with a way of ideation that works for you. This is how you will consistently create compelling imagery. Speed is nothing if it doesn’t look good.

– Emmanuel Shiu, Freelance Concept Artist



3. Diversity and Originality

The community of concept artists is bigger than ever and the quality of the artwork created is very high. We can ﬁnd a lot of different art related websites, video tutorials and podcasts talking about Concept Art. It’s easy to fall into all this concept art inspiration artwork, when you want to get inspired or if you want to see what other artists are doing. In the past few years, I heard a lot of concept artists who complain about the Internet killing their creativity, I am not sure if it’s the Internet or if it’s because we are always looking at the same things.

If you want to create something new, fresh and original, you need to diversify your reference pool. Take a break of the art websites and ﬁnd other references: in nature, objects around you and so on. This is something I learned about when I was studying Industrial Design; if you want to design a new chair, don’t look at chairs. Look at nature, architecture or anything else that will provide inspiration.

When you start doing concept art, you will want to follow what is trending. First you have to ﬁnd your own style. Not only your own design but also your own technique. You need to ﬁnd a way to make your work recognizable, your signature style.

It’s okay if your style or technique is not in the trend right now, your are probably creating the next trend.

– Martin Deschambault, Senior Concept Artist at Ubisoft Montreal



4. Composition, Silhouette and Scale Work Hand in Hand With Story Telling

When you start doing environment or object design. Think about your composition ﬁrst, make sure you have an interesting silhouette and play with the relation between the scale and shape. Sometimes I feel that my artwork is missing something, adding detail will not make it any better, maybe there is a ﬂaw in the initial composition. This is why it’s always better to do some quick composition sketches to make sure that you explored all of the possibilities. Try to think big first, the small details can come later. I think that over detailing your artwork will only create noise that will blind you from your composition. It’s best to simplify your composition to make sure that you quickly understand what we are looking at and where it is. We can easily read the scale by adding smaller elements closer to the bigger ones. Don’t forget that the artwork is telling a story. Storytelling doesn’t need to be complex, keep it simple and intriguing.

– Martin Deschambault, Senior Concept Artist at Ubisoft Montreal

5. Learn From the Old Masters

I recently learned to appreciate the works of the old masters. If you look at paintings by Alphonse Mucha, Joaquín Sorolla and Ilya Repin, you can tell that a lot of thought has been put into the designs, story and rendering of everything in the painting. This can be seen in the way the brushstrokes are carefully placed to depict materials using a minimal amount of colours as well as slight alterations of reality and choices that are made to make the figures and costumes more appealing to look at.

Sometimes I struggle when painting certain complex elements, but now I can look at a folder with works by the old masters and the answer will be there. If you look then you’ll have a rough idea of how it’s been done. Let’s say you’re painting an indoor scene with lots and lots of characters and complex lighting, look at ‘Tourbillon’ by Louis Adolphe Tessier. Whatever problem you might be facing, someone spent their entire life solving it for you. Whether it’s a badass knight, a classy portrait or simplified landscapes, the old masters got your back! I am not expecting anyone to work on an image for months and months, but I do think that there should be a benchmark for personal work because you can use all the things you learn on professional work. You have to reach new heights and build upon their legacy because when you think about it, if the old masters had all these tools that we have then they’d probably be kicking everyone’s ass on ArtStation right now!

– Efflam Mercier, Freelance Concept Artist



6. Try Your Hand at Different Things

It is important to be very skilled in one specific area, but don’t let that stop you from constantly learning new things, even if they’re the opposite of what you usually do. Companies will often hire you because you’re really good in one specific area and they need that skill for a particular project, but what makes you a good artist, is having a global understanding of the industry you intend to work in. For example if you’re going to work in video games, knowing about modelling, texturing, lighting and so on can be a great help. Even being curious about game design can help you come up with concepts that bring a lot to a game. If you’re going to work in movies, knowing about cinematography or matte painting techniques is also very important.

– Geoffrey Ernault, Senior Concept Artist at Riot Games



7. Think About the Idea Behind Your Artwork

The Idea behind the artwork, that’s what this job is about. People think it’s about art but in reality, it’s all about thoughts and ideas. Of course we need art, it’s our primary tool. We need it to execute and communicate the truly important thing, the idea. I see so many portfolios that are filled with amazingly rendered images, all beautiful in terms of illustration but the design is so mundane and ordinary, there’s no real idea behind it. So I would say practice your idea generation and originality as much as your art. Ask yourself questions constantly and fuel your imagination, not with other art but with the world around you, nature, technology and architecture. When you know about a subject you can use your imagination to extrapolate and come up with novel ideas of your own. Having a solid idea or theme behind your concept will then let you solve the visual side of it fairly quickly. Do my design decisions support the idea or destroy it? Without an idea you’re just painting pretty pictures.

– Darren Bartley, Concept Designer at Riot Games



8. Start With the Big Things Before Going to Small Details

Always work from “general” to “specific” – big to small. This applies to everything that you do, from environments and characters to creatures. Believe me, it’s a great rule of thumb. I am going to use characters for my example.

What you wanna do is figure out who the character is first. If you are working for a client, they would have taken care of this for you. However, if you are having to do this yourself then I would suggest writing up a description of the character before starting on the painting. Once you’ve got something interesting you can start!

Begin by getting the pose right, distribute the weight and communicate the attitude and activity in order to find something that enhances your character. We are working with big shapes here. Next, equip your character, again, start with the larger items before moving onto the smaller ones. I usually do this in a line. The next step will be when we start working with spectrum of colour and light, here you’d go back again and work with the colour palette before coloring separate objects. There is also the lighting, first you wanna establish what kind you want (keeping in mind you want it all to support the character), and then work on the forms. The last thing you need to do after all this is done is work in the littlest of details.

– Even Mehl Amundsen, Concept Artist at Blizzard Entertainment



9. Make the Most of Your References

References! All the old masters used to use it, so why aren’t you? When creating an artwork, I start off with a rough sketch to get the idea out of my head and down on paper whilst I’m still inspired. Once I know what direction I wanna be going with, I start searching for references on various subject matters that would help me make the best possible concept. It could be photographs of clouds, lighting from a scene in a random horror film you watched when you were a kid or even plants that only grow in one ecotope – it really doesn’t matter. All of these things can help you better your artwork by giving you knowledge and inspiration.

If you haven’t got one yet, create a reference folder today. Start off with a generic subject matter that you will use often and keep building on it by creating more folders as you go along. Every time you see a good website or find some odd place you heard about from a friend, save all the photos! It takes time and effort but it’s worth the time because you’ll have your own library in the end. Our community already has a bunch of great resources to get you started. If you’re into tanks and know everything there is to know about tanks, that knowledge will help you build accurate World War II mechs as well as other things like that. This can easily be used to your advantage. Do your research and create a more compelling concept, and even if you’re not obsessed with thanks, spend extra time doing the research to get there with whatever it is that you want.

Throw out a big net, even if you won’t use all of them, you’ll probably find a use for them next time for a completely different artwork.

Lastly, don’t stop at gathering photos. You should be saving all those amazing YouTube videos you find and downloading all the 3-D models on the web! There are a ton of these around and all you need to do is find the ones that will help you with your next piece.

– Lloyd Allan, Concept Artist at Guerrilla Games

10. Practice Traditional Techniques

Lets be completely honest, my oil painting skills suck. However I started to practice it a lot recently and almost immediately noticed the positive effects it has on almost every aspect of my daily-to-day work routine. Some of the impacts are what you would expect, while others might be a bit surprising.

Oil painting is a mess, there’s so much stuff flying around and everything you touch gets condemned to be dirty forever. If you’re not used to having a lot of disorder and chaos in your work space then you will ruin quite a lot of furniture and you’ll ruin it quick. All in all, I noticed this as soon as I started and I take it a lot more seriously now. Furthermore, every wrong brushstroke can destroy everything, so as you might guess, you begin to think a lot more about what you’re currently painting instead of endlessly zooming in on your painting and mumbling around doing little changes to the overall image (if you ask my previous clients, I’ve always been guilty of that, sometimes you would see no change in an image after two days of full work even if I swear I painted my ass off whilst being zoomed in ten-thousand percent). There’s also the economy part, you can make your life much easier if you learn how to break down your images to as few values and colors as possible while maxing out the impact. However, I’ve never been a fan of simplistic paintings, while the last sentence might be considered as an important rule of thumb by many, I’ve always been a fan of the virtuous, extremely detailed and elaborate images by artists like Édouard Detaille. That is completely subjective of course.

This might not be a tip from an authoritative perspective as I’m currently learning all of these lessons myself, but when Max asked me for a valuable art tip, this is the best I could come up with because I think that this is something that can be easily ignored if you’re used to the comfortable world of Photoshop (like I was).

– Raphael Lübke, Lead Concept Artist at Nordic Games

All images © Original artist or their respective copyright holder