But those efforts provoked a backlash among journalism groups and civil rights advocates, and as Mr. Risen’s case dragged on, Mr. Holder, who has announced plans to leave office, signaled a change in policy. He rewrote the Justice Department’s rules for subpoenaing journalists and said he would not try to put reporters in jail for doing their jobs.

That edict set up a peculiar court hearing last week. Mr. Risen took the witness stand and said he would not reveal his sources or offer any details about where he got the information. Prosecutors, under orders from Mr. Holder, did not demand answers, since that could have exposed Mr. Risen to a charge of contempt and a jail sentence.

Photo

“Mr. Risen’s under-oath testimony has now laid to rest any doubt concerning whether he will ever disclose his source or sources for Chapter 9 of State of War (or, for that matter, anything else he’s written). He will not,” prosecutors wrote in court filings. “As a result, the government does not intend to call him as a witness at trial.”

Mr. Risen testified last week that he had multiple sources and would not identify any of them. With prosecutors prohibited from demanding specifics, that testimony potentially aided Mr. Sterling’s case, so his defense team subpoenaed Mr. Risen as a defense witness. But late Monday, Edward MacMahon, a defense lawyer, said that he had withdrawn the subpoena.

Mr. Risen, who learned about the decision to drop the subpoena in a phone call from his lawyer Monday evening while in an interview, referred questions to his lawyer.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“I’m glad the government realizes that Jim Risen was an aggressive reporter doing his job and that he should not be forced to reveal his source,” Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The Times, said in a statement on Monday.

The case does not end, however, for Mr. Sterling, whose trial begins Tuesday. The Justice Department uncovered email and phone records showing that Mr. Risen and Mr. Sterling were in contact, but the evidence made public so far is largely circumstantial and prosecutors have said they could not win without Mr. Risen’s testimony.

Mr. Holder has said that one of his biggest regrets was labeling James Rosen, a Fox News reporter, a potential co-conspirator for asking about classified information.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Holder also led revisions to Justice Department’s guidelines that offer journalists more protections when prosecutors want to review their phone records, emails or notes.

Mr. Kurtzberg, a lawyer with Cahill Gordon & Reindel, said that while Mr. Risen ultimately may not have to testify, the Justice Department used the case to create court precedent that could be used to force journalists to testify in the future.

“I worry about future administrations,” he said. “Now there’s bad precedent, and not every executive branch in the future will exercise their discretion the way this one did. It didn’t have to go this way.”