

Photo Credit: Kevin Winter via Getty Images

Whether wearing bold eyeshadow colors or vibrant liquid liners, stars like Rihanna, Emma Stone and Kristen Stewart always leave us mesmerized with their makeup for green eyes, proving that they know exactly how to play up this gorgeous eye color.

There are generally three common shades of green eyes, according to Sephora Pro makeup artist Amy Suchma. There's true green, with hues of dark green and light green, which is the most rare; golden green, with hues of green and a gold/yellow; and hazel green, with hues of green with a little gold and sometimes brown.

Just like when choosing colors for brown eyes, Suchma uses an artist's color wheel and color theory to determine which tones best enhance green eyes. "On the color wheel, the most complimentary color for each hue is located directly across from the targeted color," she says. So, you'll want to gravitate towards the liners and shadows that fall between the red-violet spectrum.

What exactly does this look like? Scroll down to check out Schuma's illustrations and product recommendations for the best makeup for green eyes. You'll notice that the makeup artist uses red-browns and pink tones to accentuate true green eyes. She opts for wine, plum and lilac/lavender makeup to brighten the yellow hues in golden-green eyes. And for hazel eyes, Schuma uses eggplant, periwinkle or even navy to help intensify the flecks of green, gold and brown.

True Green Eyes



Illustration: Sephora PRO Artist Amy Suchma

Suchma suggests using eye makeup with rich red tones to make green eyes stand out. Sephora Collection #39 Cherry on Top and Make Up For Ever Artist Shadow in #846 Morello Cherry will do the trick. Another tried-and-true tip from Suchma is to lightly apply a bit of your blush (in pink hues) on your lash line a soft, fluffy eyeshadow brush with long bristles to make them look more green.

Golden Green Eyes



Illustration: Sephora PRO Artist Amy Suchma

"Smokey eyes are a gorgeous way to contrast depth with the lightness of [golden-green] eyes," says Suchma. Create this look with wine and lavender shadows like Marc Jacobs Eye-Con No. 7 Plush Shadow Palette in The Tease #202 or Dolce and Gabbana The Eyeshadow Eye Colour Duo in Gems #107. Then draw black liner in the waterline to add definition.

Hazel Green Eyes



Illustration: Sephora PRO Artist Amy Suchma

Combine periwinkle liner such as Clinique Chubby Stick Shadow Tint in Plush Periwinkle on the upper lash line and sweep a shadow like Kat Von D Ink Liner in Nietzsche along the lower lash line. "Adding a violet/plum mascara to the look will enhance the effect even more!" says Suchma.

If you want to ease your way into bold eye makeup for green eyes, Suchma recommends a shimmering green shadow that matches the lightest color in your eye. Place that on the upper lid or in the inner corners of eyes to bring out their natural color. Try Make Up For Ever Star Powder #910 Celadon. "The shimmer powder is unparalleled," says Suchma.



Illustration: Sephora PRO Artist Amy Suchma

The makeup artist's absolute favorite trick is to wear lipstick with the above hue suggestions. She says, "When I want to enhance a green eye and keep the look very fresh, I will apply a red, pink or violet lip color to provide contrast to the eye while keeping the shadows very soft and neutral. It really works." Her top lip color picks include, Bite Beauty Matte Crème Lip Pencil in Aubergine, Sephora Collection Cream Lip Stain #12 African Violet and Marc Jacobs Kiss Pop Color Stick in Pop Rock #614.



Illustration: Sephora PRO Artist Amy Suchma



Follow Us On Pinterest

| Like Us On Facebook |

Follow Us On Twitter