Updated July 24, 2017

By Corrine Lane

“I Love Painfully”

The first secret to know about a Scorpio in love is that it does NOT refer to a sun-sign Scorpio person. Only someone with the planet Venus in Scorpio will be a “Scorpio in love.” (Venus Sign Calculator)

Venus in Scorpio love is intense, loyal, passionate, deep, focused, private, dark and obsessive. They experience extreme, consuming feelings in love. People with Venus in Scorpio love so deeply and so intensely that they have a difficult time finding a partner who’s love matches their level of depth. Only another Venus in Scorpio can match their level of intensity. These lovers long for “soulmate” bonding, the undying union of souls like that of Romeo and Juliet, or Heloise and Abelard.



You may not know when a Venus in Scorpio likes you because they hide it until you surrender at their feet. Venus in Scorpio lovers don’t win your love by courting you. They lure you in with their mysterious animal magnetism. The victim, I mean the object of their affection, will not know how or why, but cannot help falling under their spell. How do they do this? Venus in Scorpio lovers are intuitive and able to penetrate deep into your psyche, discovering all your secrets as they observe you. They can see into your soul. When Venus in Scorpio loves you, they focus only on you, not having eyes for anyone else. They are intensely loyal and passionate. Scorpio’s passion is not “showy” like the fire signs; Scorpio passion is a silent, deep well of never-ending commitment and loyalty. But even if they love you, they will not open up to you easily. They remain mysteriously reserved until they decide to trust you. If you earn their trust, they are capable of deep tenderness and open intimacy. If Venus in Scorpio loves you, they will risk anything, even their own life, for you. They are extremely protective of those they love. Scorpio is a water sign, so they express love on an emotional level. They have deep emotions.

Scorpio is also a fixed sign; they have deep reserves of willpower. They can wait a lifetime for the one they want; they don’t change their mind often. Unlike the fixed Taurus lovers, Scorpio is not tempted by pleasure because Scorpio doesn’t mind a little pain. Venus in Scorpio lovers are not attracted to flirting or casual hookups. This makes Venus in Scorpio probably the most faithful sign. They want to love only one person their whole life. They can be obsessive about this. However, they will cheat on you without flinching if you are not “the one.”

Venus in Scorpio has many problems. The planet Venus is considered to be “in detriment” when in the sign of Scorpio; this makes love and pleasure difficult. Scorpio love is not lighthearted, nor playful, but rather heavy and serious. Many potential partners are turned off by such a heavy type of love. Scorpio lovers are suspicious, jealous, and manipulative but will never admit it. They are always in psychological control, which hinders emotional connections even though as water signs they crave an emotional connection. Another obstacle to intimacy is the fact that they are extremely secretive.

Venus in Scorpio’s love-life will always be scarred with a touch of pain or death. Some may literally have a fetish for pain or death; they can be masochists, sadists, suicidal, and/or antisocial. As a positive outlet, they may have an appreciation for Gothic art. They have compulsive desires when it comes to love. They feel in extremes: they either love you deeply or hate you deeply, never anything in the middle. They never forgive. Venus in Scorpio is capable of hating you with the same level of passion as they once loved. They are capable of cold-hearted, bloody vengeance if you cross their invisible, psychological line. They do not blow up like the fire signs; rather, they silently premeditate their vengeance. You will never see it coming. You may not even guess that anything is wrong, but make no mistake, if you have crossed their line, they are planning revenge. After that, reconciliation will never be possible because they never forgive. You will be “dead” to them. Venus in Scorpio never feels guilty because they believe you deserve any pain they inflict on you. They can leave you for dead without looking back if you break their trust. Since trusting is a problem for them, many stay single and lonely by choice. Some choose to stay single until they find their soulmate.

Venus in Scorpio never has to worry about finding sexual partners; their sexual magnetism ensures this. They are very sexual, and usually become skilled at controlling their sexual urges as adults. However strong their urges, they will skip sex if they don’t trust you.

Sex and relationships with Venus in Scorpio can have the power to heal, or at least transform, both partners in some way. This can only happen after some form of death or loss in your relationship.

Venus in Scorpio men are attracted to women who are mysterious, silent, confident, in control, and powerful. They are attracted to a partner who is capable of deep emotional intimacy. When it comes to physical looks, they are attracted to sexy women who exude sexual magnetism subliminally, but not attracted to flirty types.

The Venus in Scorpio lady is very sexy, not necessarily pretty. She is mysterious. She may prefer to dress in black. She only reveals what she has premeditated to reveal. Both men and women fall under her spell when she walks into a room. Did I say she is sexy?

Some famous (and infamous) people with Venus in Scorpio are Leonardo Dicaprio, Bill Gates, Denzel Washington, Bruce Lee, Charles Manson, Matt Damon, Ethan Hawke, Lucky Luciano, Ozzy and Sharon Osbourne, Demi Moore, Winona Ryder, Anne Hathaway, and Alicia Silverstone.



How to Love Venus in Scorpio

It is extremely difficult to make a Venus in Scorpio lover feel loved. If you dare to try, begin by operating on the water level (emotional level) since this is a water sign. Pour out your soul to them. But remember, like Cancer Venus, they can tell if you are sincere; but unlike Cancer Venus, Scorpio may kill you if you are insincere. So if you really love a Venus in Scorpio, simply hand them your heart. They will not take that lightly.

They like to keep romantic things private. Don’t declare your love in the middle of a football game on the big screen in front of the entire stadium. The scorpion will crawl under a rock and never forgive you for embarrassing them. They prefer to keep your love just between the two of you.

Let them know that you want something deeper and more serious than a casual relationship. Let them know you want to be with them forever and ever. That’s what they want. Romantic dates, fun outings, and expensive gifts are all minor compared to their main priority: soul-level bonding like Romeo and Juliet. You must provide experiences of deep emotional bonding rather than just sex and romance to catch a Scorpio lover. Most importantly, if you want them to feel that you love them, they must sense that you are very deep, emotionally. If you are shallow, light-hearted, and fun, you will lose them.

Don’t ever flirt, not even with them because they are turned off by light, meaningless flirting. They are turned off by anything meaningless, so be careful not to say things you don’t mean. They consider that a sign of insincerity, and remember what they’re capable of if you are insincere. They are always observing you, expecting to catch you messing up. You have to reassure them of your love often. Be sympathetic and caring towards them. Don’t be thoughtless or unfeeling. They are always expecting you to stop loving them. Prove them wrong. They respect being proven wrong, but this may take you a lifetime to prove to them. Not to be outdone by the Earth signs’ desire for a perfect partner, Venus in Scorpio wants a lover who will bleed for them. If you’ve proven yourself, Venus in Scorpio will also willingly bleed for you. The bad news is, what is left after you both bleed? This is where the “Romeo and Juliet” analogy comes in.

Above all, don’t be an emotional wimp. Yes, be emotional by expressing your deep feelings, but be proud and confident about your feelings. Scorpio lovers have no respect for an emotional wimp. They have no respect for weakness of any kind. They want a strong, powerful lover. Strong, for them, means having the confidence to experience deep emotional bonding. If you have a fear of commitment, you shouldn’t even be reading this article.

So, bleed a little and cut out your heart, and you’ll be rewarded with the most passionate of lovers who will adore you to the death, after death, and then some.

Note: Your Venus sign shows your characteristics in close relationships, not necessarily in any other area of your life. Conjunctions to Venus from the outer planets will alter your love style.

Read more about Venus in Scorpio. Read about the Water Sign Love Language since Scorpio is a water sign.

Find out your Venus sign with our Venus Sign Calculator.