How’s the Throwdown treating you? If you’re logging tons of miles, great—but if you’ve slacked off a bit or are just joining us, that’s fine too. This week’s workout is for everyone. We’re going to run some tiny solo races, and they will make you faster.

This post is part of the Turkey Trot Throwdown, a series of mini challenges to spark (or reignite) your love of running. By the time Thanksgiving arrives, you’ll be ready to run a race—or, if you prefer, to jog a victory lap around the block before sitting down to your feast. You’ve earned it.

Advertisement

What we’re doing today is a type of interval training. With intervals, you work hard for a few seconds or minutes, then take a break to catch your breath. Intervals are a really efficient way to build endurance in your heart and lungs, and running fast helps build muscle in your legs.

It’s also just plain fun. We’re going to run some quick one-minute “races” with two minutes of recovery in between. During the recovery segments, you’ll just walk and catch your breath. (If you feel like jogging, that’s fine, but not required.) Here’s the workout:

Start with with ten minutes of easy jogging , or a walking/jogging mix, whatever you usually do.

, or a walking/jogging mix, whatever you usually do. If you’re at a track, you’ll run the straightaway . Stand in the innermost lane, at whatever looks like most a starting line, and run. This should be about 80 to 90 percent of your top speed. You should feel tired but not dead by the end.

. Stand in the innermost lane, at whatever looks like most a starting line, and run. This should be about 80 to 90 percent of your top speed. You should feel tired but not dead by the end. If you’re not at a track, run this by time . Run for one minute, likewise at 80 to 90 percent of your top speed. If you note where you started and where you ended, you can put your watch away and remember those landmarks.

. Run for one minute, likewise at 80 to 90 percent of your top speed. If you note where you started and where you ended, you can put your watch away and remember those landmarks. After running your mini race, take it easy for two minutes. If you walk slowly back to the start, that’s about the right time. Take a little extra time if you need, but remember, if you feel like you want to collapse, you ran a little too hard. Take it down a notch next time.

If you walk slowly back to the start, that’s about the right time. Take a little extra time if you need, but remember, if you feel like you want to collapse, you ran a little too hard. Take it down a notch next time. Repeat. Do a total of four mini races, and see how you feel. Beginners can quit here. Experienced runners, knock yourself out—10 or 12 would make a good workout.

Beginners can quit here. Experienced runners, knock yourself out—10 or 12 would make a good workout. Cool down with ten minutes of easy jogging or walking. Timing isn’t critical here—five minutes is fine, or you can stay out longer if it’s a nice day and you’re enjoying the sunset. Just make sure to end on a high note, and your brain will record this whole workout as a good memory.

If you’d like to do this workout at a track, check local schools. Most high schools have a track that is open to the public outside of school hours; you can call the school office to check, or just show up and look for signs. The straightaway is 100 meters, so you can tell your running friends “I did some speedwork! 4x100 meters today.”

Advertisement

Speedwork—that’s the runner’s term for intervals—can take many different forms. If you’d like to explore further, check out our guide to speedwork. Going forward, try to work a little bit of speedwork into your routine each week. You can do today’s workout once a week, or pick a different workout each time.

One of my favorite simple types of speedwork is the 30-20-10, where you run 30 seconds slow, 20 seconds medium, and 10 seconds fast. Another is the fartlek, where you just make it up as you go along: run fast when you feel like it, and recover when you feel like it.

Some running apps have interval programs built in, or you can try this 27-minute audio track where record-setting sprinter Michael Johnson talks you through a speed workout with plenty of encouragement and heart-pounding music.

Whatever you choose, speedwork is a fun way to get stronger and faster, while adding variety to your workout routine. Try it out, and let us know how it went!