Your Horoscope by Susan Miller

Hold on to your hat, as changes are on the way. Your life in August – and possibly September, too – will be very busy and likely to be memorable. Eclipses change the status quo, shake us up, and take us out of our comfort zone. It is through adapting to change and moving forward that we grow and mature. Life is for the courageous, and you will see this to be true as you gain experience. If you should feel you don’t like the changes that come up, you will be able to make changes later. Keep an open mind – an eclipse can take several weeks, and sometimes several months – before its message is clearly delivered. For that reason, don’t say any certain eclipse was good or bad; the universe needs time to show you its plan.

The way things play out might be better than anything you could have imagined, for the first eclipse, August 7 in Aquarius 15 degrees, will hit the very pinnacle point of your chart – your tenth house of honors, awards, and achievement. This suggests exciting professional recognition is on the way to you. A full moon brings a culmination to events, so the work you’ve been doing in your career, possibly going back a decade or more, will be rewarded and known by many in your industry or the world at this time.

Sometimes the reward comes naturally, without too much effort. In that case, you might get a promotion or an offer for an exciting new job. Sometimes the universe has to figure out a way to get you out of your current career position so that you can find a new position that would use your talents more fully. In that case you might be forced to leave, at no fault of your own, and then have to look for that new position. If this is how it works out for you, look with confidence. Later you will say that they did you a favor. Here is why I feel that way.

Jupiter, the good fortune planet, is currently moving through your workaday sector (sixth house), indicating you’ve been working on a number of special projects that have come to the attention of VIPs. They clearly are impressed with your work, and clients are pleased too, and subsequently these influential people have put you on the short list of stars that show great potential. Now it’s time for your reward. Or, it may be, say, you are a director, have finished shooting a major movie, and now it’s finished and about to be released – I feel you will garner much acclaim.

If you are self-employed, you know by now that you get new clients, and for any reason, lose a client, a shift seems to be underway, but none so much as to worry you. I should mention that no matter if you are self-employed or work for others, this month you might get an award or excellent publicity. If you do, it will change everything – your outlook, your prospects, your plans, and your own view of yourself – for this is the aim of an eclipse. The universe will find a way to give you reward in one way or another, so keep your eyes open and stay optimistic. It’s also possible that a top-level woman (lunar eclipses point to women) might announce a departure from the company and that change in the hierarchy could crate opportunity for you.

The month’s second eclipse, August 21 in Leo, 29 degrees, will focus on your home and property, or possibly your family. You may be relocating to accommodate the new job, or move now that you can raise your standard of living due to the better pay you will be making. Or, it may be that you need to make an important repair or renovation on your home, and that may have nothing to do with your career. This eclipse is a new moon, which opens a window of opportunity when none existed before. Eclipses tend to bring sudden news, so be ready. You may move, switch roommates (or have none at all, thereby doubling your space), paint rooms, or undertake a number of changes to your home to make it cheerful and a cozier place to be. You might buy or rent new property, such as a vacation home, for example. If you have been trying to think of a way to assist one of your parents, the new moon solar eclipse of August 21 can help you find the ideal solution, for your parents are covered by the same fourth house.

This August 21 eclipse will receive a shimmering beam from Uranus, bringing surprise news, and from Saturn, increasing your sense of security. No matter how many ways you look at the facets of this eclipse, it should be favorable or have very favorable parts or outcome. A golden triangle of enormous harmony will appear in the heavens linking the eclipse: Sun (new moon plus Mars cuddled in your house of home), to Uranus (surprising, sudden help), and the third part of the triangle, to Saturn (currently in your financial house of other people’s money). If you need funding, there is a good chance you will get precisely the amount of money you need, such as from a home improvement loan or mortgage, as two examples, of funds that you might need. If your parents are in good health, one parent might be very sympathetic to your needs and give you a financial gift or loan to help you get started.

Daily Astrology Zone With our new subscription service you get forecasts for your sign each day of the year from the top astrologer in the world. Subscribe Now »