A Sample Residential Construction Schedule - (for a 6,000 square foot custom home) Is the Microsoft Project template file used to create this new house construction schedule for sale? Yes, a number of professional custom homebuilders and residential project managers have asked to buy the Microsoft Project file that was used to create the new house construction schedule shown on this page. In response to these requests, we are providing sample construction scheduling files for you to review so that you can determine if your residential construction company might benefit from using a scheduling program to help manage your home building business. [ download sample files ] How long does it take to build a house? Scroll down this page to see an example of a typical construction schedule for a large custom home. It was produced using Microsoft Project® scheduling software and includes most, but not all, of the activities involved in the process of building a new house in Maryland. Sample construction draws have been included for reference purposes, although individual lenders & mortgage companies will most likely have their own draw schedules. Notice that because construction draws from the lender typically follow the completion of various phases, or milestones, the cash flow on a project can be very irregular. While the money flowing out of a construction company; for employee salaries, benefits, office space, vehicles, insurance, equipment and other company expenses, typically occurs on a regular calendar based timeline, the money used to pay these expenses follows an event driven schedule. Therefore, besides the "normal" unplanned events that can affect the progress of a home building project, it is not uncommon for home builders to rearrange construction schedules in order to gain access to draw money so that they are able to pay subcontractors and suppliers in a timely manner. By the way, this is generally a good thing (provided you have an honest builder) because subcontractors tend to follow the money and happy subs are almost always preferable to unhappy ones:-) Will your house take this long to build? Probably not; most home building projects will take less time, but some will take even more. For example, the timeline for a smaller house, with few options and less detailed finishes, which has been built many times before by professional builders, might be as short as 8 to 12 weeks. However, 6 to 9 months from start to finish is probably a more realistic average (average is not a good word for a typical homeowner). While a larger house, with more options, custom features, fancier finishes, and more owner involvement - especially if the owner has little construction experience - may very well take 1 1/2 to 2 years to complete. Then again, if you build your own house, and make the common mistake of moving in before every last detail is finished, well, you might be looking at decades instead of months or years — I speak from experience, but it's just a little trim in the powder room, and a short piece of baseboard behind the master bath door, and a small piece of molding in the hallway linen closet, and.... The actual schedule of completion for your specific project will vary based upon many factors including, but not limited to, size and degree of difficulty of the structure, site and weather conditions, material and contractor availability, crew sizes, effective scheduling and communication, the knowledge and experience of those managing the project, and perhaps most significantly, the number, timeliness, and complexity of the changes you will inevitably make to the original contract after construction has already begun. Good luck with your project, thank you for visiting B4UBUILD.COM, and have fun building!