New apps need lovin’ too, right? Every day there are thousands of additions to the Google Play store, but many go unnoticed and never receive the attention they deserve. We’ve shown in the past that this community can discover great apps and propel them to new heights. Our weekly Fresh Meat column highlights new apps with fewer than 100,000 installs. Browse our new Android app picks below and let us know which ones you enjoy.

YouTube TV

Description: YouTube TV is currently available to residents of the following areas: Chicago, Los Angeles, New York City, Philadelphia, San Francisco Bay Area. For more info, please see tv.youtube.com. Stream from major broadcast and cable channels ABC, CBS, FOX, NBC, The CW, ESPN, your local sports channels & more.



bxActions - for Galaxy S8

Description: With bxActions you can remap your Bixby button to any action or app you like! Use the Bixby button launch you camera, open google, toggle recent apps or launch any app you like! All features are free!

CBS News – Live Breaking News

Description: The completely redesigned app features CBSN, a free 24/7 digital news channel from CBS News. CBSN has live anchored coverage, original reporting, and breaking news in an innovative interactive video experience. Watch what’s live now or use on-demand to view past segments on topics that interest you the most. No cable subscription required.

Today Weather

Description: Today Weather is a beautiful & simple-to-use weather app that provides the world’s most accurate local weather forecasts. Display weather forecast clearly and easy to understand. Enjoy every moment you open the app with thousands of beautiful photos corresponding to the weather and the day. Prepare for anything with 24/7 weather forecast and chance of rain. Protect your health with air quality and UV index.



Volume Notification

Description: Access your device’s sound sliders straight from the notification drawer!Featuring quick settings for Android N and a discrete notification that matches your launcher for Android 4.1 and above. You’ll only notice that it’s there when you need it.



Music Mate



Description: Music Mate, the missing app between YouTube videos and your player is finally available on Android! The app automatically finds the official YouTube video of the song you are currently listening to. Music Mate is fully compatible with Spotify, Play Music, Pandora and a lot of other streaming or MP3 players!

(Playboard) | (Play Store)

Runtasty

Description: Get 40+ free healthy recipes and kitchen hacks! Your complete healthy recipe book right in your phone. Want a low-calorie healthy treat to satisfy your sweet tooth? Need a quick post-workout recipe to fuel the gains? Pop open your Runtasty cooking recipes app and head to the market.



Coastiality VR

Description: Coastiality VR was especially developed for all Daydream supported Android devices. Your visit to the theme park was over much too quickly? Imagine what it would be like if you could re-live some of your adventures anytime and anywhere – directly on your smartphone AND in 360° virtual reality (VR)!

XFINITY Mobile

Description: XFINITY Mobile is here. Introducing a new kind of network that lets you stay connected no matter what, and access more data for less money. With the XFINITY Mobile App, you can manage your XFINITY Mobile Account from anywhere.



Magnetic

Description: Magnetic lets you quickly and easily create professional, branded presentations from your tablet. Choose from a range of pre-created templates to style your presentation with only a few taps. Add photos, videos, record audio, display graphs, and much more to bring the story to life.