Are you ready for the Best Ever Pottery Barn Knock Off?

We’re super excited (and honored) to be a part of Knocktoberfest 2013, the brainchild of the incredible Lindsay from Makely . Knocktoberfest is basically a blog event that features 25 awesome bloggers “knocking off” some of their favorite products. You know we love knock offs- duh, it’s the name of our TV show ! 🙂 If you’re stopping over from Funky Junk Interiors , welcome! We’re thrilled you’re here. Donna is so cool, isn’t she? And such a hard act to follow, but we’re going to give it our best shot!

My entryway was in desperate need of a stylish, but functional table. Here’s what I came up with!

It was inspired by this Pottery Barn Griffin Console Table that is….wait for it….$1099!! It’s made of steel and a reclaimed wood slab, which is why it’s mucho moolah, but I got the same look using wood I had on hand from other projects! I’m really happy with the way it turned out.

I used (4) 1×2 pieces of pine, (1) 2x12x12, dark walnut stain, gray paint and Rustoleum Oil Rubbed Bronze spray paint. Pottery Barn is generous enough to share the measurements for their table (thanks PB!), so we just tweaked them to fit the wood we had.

I started by measuring the lengths of wood that I needed.

We ended up cutting (4) pieces at 36 inches for the vertical legs, (4) at 48 inches for the horizontal pieces and (6) at 6 inches for the cross pieces. Side note: I love the chop saw. That’s all.

Once we had all of our pieces cut, we made two boxes by attaching the vertical pieces to the horizontal pieces with the drill.

Then we attached the boxes with the 6 inch cross pieces at the bottom, in the middle (we measured halfway up the vertical pieces) and the top.

Then, using my trusty oil-rubbed bronze spray paint, I sprayed the legs of the table. The wood really sucked up the paint, so I had to do several light coats before I got the coverage I wanted.

After I attached the wood plank to the top of my base (we screwed up from the underside), I stained it with Rustoleum Dark Walnut stain. It wasn’t exactly the color I was looking for so I watered down some gray paint and brushed that on and then wiped it off to get what I wanted.

I put it in it’s place of honor by the front door and dressed it up a bit. Doesn’t it look cute- and by cute, I mean super stylish?

Even though I didn’t use real steel- sadly I don’t have much time for welding- I think the legs look a lot like real metal!

And ok, I’ll share one last picture since you’ve begged me.

Man, I just love knocking off cool stuff for way less money! If you love knock offs like we do, check out our TV Show “Knock It Off” You can watch full episodes online! And, make sure you check out all of the awesome projects on the Knocktoberfest page, but before you do that, head over to visit Jackie from Teal and Lime to see what she came up with. And a huge thanks to Lindsay for including us!!

Did you know East Coast Creative’s Most Popular Blog Project of all time is now for sale?!?

Get Ready to Break Up with Your Bedtime Routine!

Check out our online store!