In the 1960s he had long hair when he was busing tables at the Village Gate, playing drums with the Holy Modal Rounders and writing the experimental, Samuel Beckett-influenced plays that would make his name, but somehow his appearance did not suggest hippie. He had, instead, the look of a man who had ridden into town. He might stay the night. Then again he might not.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Across his long and accidental-seeming career he made alliances — through romance, friendship, work — with others like Patti Smith, Bob Dylan, Jessica Lange and Cormac McCarthy, whose different styles, like his, seemed somehow a byproduct of their intelligence and talent.

Film directors loved him. Directors of photography probably loved him more. He was at the far edge of handsome, where it begins to tip over into pretty. Like Gary Cooper, to whom he was often compared, Mr. Shepard knew he didn’t have to do much to hold an audience’s attention. Hit the mark. Make the camera come to you. Don’t lard up a line of dialogue with a cheap display of emotion.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story The Open Thread Fashion Newsletter A look from across The New York Times at the forces that shape the dress codes we share, with Vanessa Friedman as your personal shopper. Sent weekly. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

It is probably no accident that his written work and onscreen presence fascinated European directors like Michelangelo Antonioni and Wim Wenders: In his understated masculinity he was a throwback, an endangered species. He seemed vaguely tortured, and he wasn’t about to tell you why.

He pulled off the trick of remaining aloof from popular culture even as he lent some grit to the popular weepie “The Notebook” (2004).

He did not do social media. He was not beholden to Instagram-driven celebrity culture. Still, he was enough of a creature of show business to understand that looks count for something on stage and screen. As John Lahr wrote in The New Yorker, “he seemed instinctively to understand the importance of image.”

Mr. Shepard did not set out to achieve a look — or, perhaps, he did a very good impression of someone who was nonchalant about his appearance.

Like Cooper and James Dean — and let’s throw Beckett in there, too, with the beautiful hair and the minimalist outfits — Mr. Shepard had something in short supply in this time of public figures crying out for likes. And that something was coolness, a mode of presentation and expression that may have just reached its end.