I studied the map, weighed my options, examined the bus schedule, but I knew the solution was simple — I’d have to Evel Knievel it, jump the canyon and learn to drive at 50. I had eight months to fight the dread and get the task done.

I procrastinated for half a year, finding a multitude of reasons not to take lessons. The calendar days ticked off, yet I remained paralyzed. It was irrational, yes, but nothing scared me more than the notion of driving. There would be natural wonders to lure me out of complacency, like the redwood forest, Crater Lake and the Pacific Crest Trail, all within driving distance of Ashland. I weighed the regret against the fear; the self-flagellation grew. Rewriting my play was my only refuge; if nothing else, the script would be ready to go into rehearsal.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Subscribe to the Theater Newsletter Every week, stay on top of the latest news, interviews and reviews from Broadway and beyond. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Then I reached the do-or-die point, and six weeks before leaving for Oregon, I finally got the courage to walk to the D.M.V. at the Atlantic Center in Brooklyn and get my learner’s permit. Two weeks later, I took the five-hour driver’s ed course in a grimy auto school that seemed frozen in time, perhaps 1975.

I watched a series of safety videos, one of which was narrated by Bruce Jenner. Some of the tapes were so antiquated that they featured people puffing on cigarettes while cruising in convertibles without seatbelts. I then booked a handful of driving lessons with a professional instructor, occasionally leaning on my husband, Tony, for pep talks. I paid the rush fee to take the test and received a time and a date to meet my fate.

On May 21, 2015, I took my driving test in the Bronx; it was the only available opening, and I had been told that the road test was easier than in Brooklyn. The report called my parallel parking “deficient,” but nevertheless the examiner, a fellow middle-aged woman, took pity and relented. Eight days later, armed with a flimsy temporary license, I flew to Oregon, and the next day I picked up a rental car and for the first time in my life drove by myself on a highway. It was harrowing and thrilling. I glanced at the speedometer and realized I was only doing 35 miles an hour. It felt like 90.

We had a memorable and magical summer. I mounted the new play and worked with an inspired group of collaborators. I drove my nature-deprived city kids through the redwood forest to the Pacific Ocean, where they danced on the beach. I experienced my first road kill, a suicidal chipmunk that dashed under my tire, much to the chagrin of my screaming children. I even learned how to pump gas.

A week after returning home from Oregon, I received a call from my manager about a TV writing gig in Los Angeles. Generally, I’d create excuses and ailments to avoid such a trip. This time I said yes.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Los Angeles freeways are a bit different from the bucolic roads of Oregon wine country where I cut my teeth. I landed at LAX and picked up the rental car, only to be told that there were no GPS devices left. Someone suggested that I use my cellphone.

It took 15 minutes to figure out how to start the keyless car. And then I drove to my meeting, taking the 105 to the 405 to the 10.

At some point on the highway, my cell slipped to the floor just out of reach. Like a Jedi knight, I fought back panic and used the Force to guide me through midday traffic. Upon arriving, my hands were drained of blood from clutching the steering wheel.

I got the job. As dawn was breaking, I drove back to the airport, more relaxed and less tense. It felt as if I had summited Mount Everest, without oxygen, at night.