One tool, for example, is helping at-risk teenagers avoid pregnancy. Consider a 17-year-old we met in Tulsa., Okla., Nataly Ledesma, who became pregnant the summer after sixth grade at age 13 by a 28-year-old man.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I had never heard of condoms or birth control,” she said. “By the time I took ‘family health’ class in ninth grade, my baby was almost 2.”

If she had had early sex education and access to birth control, she said, she probably would not have become pregnant.

In short, what we lack most is not means but political will. The main public response to American poverty has been a great big national shrug — and that is why I wish the candidates were talking more about this, why I wish the public and the media were demanding that politicians address the issue.

Liberals too often are reluctant to acknowledge that struggling, despairing people sometimes compound their misfortune by self-medicating or engaging in irresponsible, self-destructive behavior. And conservatives too often want to stop the conversation there, without acknowledging our society’s irresponsible, self-destructive refusal to help children who are otherwise programmed for failure.

Child poverty is an open sore on the American body politic. It is a moral failing for our nation that one-fifth of our children live in poverty, by one common measure.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Nicholas Kristof Newsletter Receive emails about each column and other occasional commentary. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In Tulsa we also met a young woman almost the same age as Cassidy — and a perfect contrast. Cassidy, 21, is wicked smart and a brilliant future journalist. But she knows that she won the lottery of birth and was headed for success the moment she was born to a doctor and a lawyer in Madison, Wis.

Photo

Bethany Underwood, 20, lost the lottery of birth. Her father was arrested for drug offenses before she was born. Her mother used methamphetamine when pregnant and then disappeared into prison when Bethany was 3. A friend of the family abused her sexually when she was small, and she responded to the pain by self-medicating.

“I began using marijuana at 9,” Bethany remembered. By 14 she had graduated to injecting meth and became an addict. “Getting drugs wasn’t a problem because all my friends’ parents did drugs,” she said. “We would steal it.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

While Cassidy was thriving at private school, Bethany was skipping school, completely dropping out in the eighth grade. “I’m at third grade in reading,” she said, “and probably second grade in math. Because third graders are really good at math.”

Bethany ran away from home at 14 and eventually settled with a boyfriend who sold meth for a living; she says he treated her well, except for the time he dragged her out of a hotel room by the hair.

That was because she was injecting meth while pregnant with his baby. The child was born two months ago, and Bethany today is in the Tulsa Women and Children’s Center, a residential drug treatment program with a strong record of helping women start their lives over.

Sure, Bethany made poor choices, but almost any of us born in that environment might have done the same. And while we should demand better choices from people like Bethany, we should also insist on better choices from our politicians; both are necessary to reduce poverty.

Bethany and Cassidy are similar — both ebullient, friendly personalities, charming and quick to laugh. But in effect they grew up on different planets. And anybody who blames Bethany for her troubles doesn’t understand the axiom of America today: Talent is universal, but opportunity is not.

Chipping away at these cycles of poverty isn’t easy, and we won’t have perfect success. But we aren’t even trying. We aren’t even paying attention.