The kitchen island is often the central hub of a home, so why not make one that reflects your home's core style? Start with an unexpected base—vintage dressers, drafting cabinets and bookshelves are all fair game—then top it with a counter and elevate it on a set of casters. The heart of your home is about to become your favorite conversation piece.

In a minimalist Icelandic kitchen featured on Nordic Design, a vintage set of drawers with old-fashioned hardware infuses the space with character. DIY one by finding a flat-topped architect's filing cabinet, adding a countertop (even an IKEA one), and lining the drawers so you can use them to store measuring cups and rubber spatulas.

Wishing that her home had more tucked-away storage spaces, Vanessa from A Modern Vintage Home repurposed an old dresser into an island.

When you put casters and a wooden top on a freshly-painted sideboard, it suddenly turns into a functional kitchen island, with an extra shelf for storing serving boards and baskets. In this kitchen from DecorPad, a couple high stools let the island double as a breakfast bar.

A rustic table with turned legs and a rough-hewn top stands in contrast to a clean, white-tiled kitchen on Svenngarden.

To turn a desk into a rolling island, Old House Online painted it, adjusted the height by attaching casters, and topped it with a piece of laminate to match the counters.

A vintage drafting table provides plenty of storage in this kitchen by Umanoff Design.

Repurposing bookshelves as a kitchen island is the ideal way to keep your favorite cookbooks close at hand, as shown in the home above photographed by Jessica Antola and spotlighted on Desire to Inspire. For a clever IKEA hack, I'm thinking this would be a great use for a KALLAX.

There are a lot of wooden pallet DIYs circling around Pinterest, but this one from BHG is surprisingly stylish, thanks to that lovely butcher block top.

In this rustic kitchen from Country Living, a wood-and-metal military desk gets a second life as a kitchen island. To make your own, just outfit the top of a vintage desk with a new clean butcher block, and it's ready for meal prep.