Are you in or are you out? On Tuesday, fiery Mars rolls into Virgo and your "all or nothing" eighth house until October 22. During this cycle, the only shade of grey you'll stand for is the type that takes place in the boudoir. Mars in the eighth house makes you uber magnetic, but you'll also crave a deep and soulful bond. Connecting emotionally and sharing yourself vulnerably (things that have been known to give your chill sign the willies) will actually energize you over the coming seven weeks. If you're in a relationship, Mars stokes the embers, but first you may have to get real about some buried resentment. Have you been hiding something from your sweetie—or suspecting that something's been kept from you? The eighth house is the chamber of secrets, and forthright Mars pries the lock right off. As tough as these revelations can be, raw honesty brings back the love. Warning: The green-eyed monster could pay you a visit by October 22. You won't be a fan of sharing attention, and may feel downright possessive. While it's fine to ask for extra reassurance, no one can fill in those confidence gaps. To maintain balance, tend to your creativity and independent interests. In other words, be the center of your own universe, Aquarius. Mars only visits this sultry part of your chart once every two years, so don't let this sexy spell pass you by! Do what it takes to get your motors revving: Shop for new lingerie, take a tantra workshop, and drink in the admiration that's surely coming your way. The eighth house also rules money—the kind that comes in larger lump sums like royalties, commissions, legal settlements and investment dollars. This is your cosmic call to get fired up about raising your financial IQ. You could be playing the market with great success before the year is through. If you have an invention or creative work to shop around, it might bring a flow of passive income. Working with a savvy agent or representative can help you command higher earnings, even if you have to skim a percentage off the top. A little extra cash invested now will save you from paying for endless do-overs later. Don't skimp on quality!

Also on Tuesday, communication planet Mercury ends a signal-jamming three-week retrograde in your partnership zones. Until September 29, the winged messenger powers ahead in Leo then Virgo (switching over on September 9), helping to make your most important duos dynamic again. Coupled Aquarians may have weathered some communication meltdowns since August 12 or just felt they couldn't get through to each other. But that will soon feel like ancient history. In fact, if there's a matter you've been holding in for a while, spill! You'll be back in sync and stronger than ever. Single? Before the weekend, you'll already feel braver about wading back in to the dating pool. Or, since retrogrades rule the past, you might be dealing with the unexpected return of an ex who almost wrecked a perfectly functional relationship. The fog starts to lift now, helping you determine whether to permanently block this old flame or launch a reunion tour.

On Wednesday, the full moon in Pisces and your second house of finances brings another economic stimulus package from the heavens. Thanks to your efforts of the past six months, you could receive a job offer—at a new firm or your current place of employment—or you might hear through the grapevine about a gig worth applying for over the coming two weeks. La luna also shines a light on where you can stretch to make yourself more valuable. Are there skills you could acquire through a workshop or webinar that can help you move up the ladder or command a higher salary? Sign up! This full moon isn't just about making bank. It can indicate some important spending, perhaps on a purchase you've been researching (or simply coveting) for a while. But since Pisces rules illusions, be sure to stick to your budget and don't fall for a slick sales pitch. Anything worth having is worth waiting for, even if you put it on hold for 24 hours to make sure that you absolutely, unequivocally want and need it. But if you've been squirreling away funds for a firm new mattress or a camel colored trench, you could find the perfect deal this week. Shop around!



SEE ANOTHER SIGN’S WEEKLY HOROSCOPE