

AP Photo/Noreen Nasir

As the Republicans set about dismantling the Affordable Care Act, they face a number of dangers, one of which is that they may have overestimated their own supporters’ commitment to their particular free-market version of health care. Most signs are that Donald Trump will sign a bill repealing the ACA, but in the debate over what Republicans will replace it with, a question presents itself: What do working-class Trump supporters really want from our health care system?

A new article in today’s New York Times by Drew Altman, the head of the Kaiser Family Foundation, helps answer that question. It reports on some focus groups the KFF ran to talk to working-class Trump supporters about health care, and it contains some surprising insights about what they actually want out of the system.

These prototypical Trump voters are not necessarily behind the Republican vision for health care: get rid of the ACA, and replace it with some kind of market-driven system that gets as far away from government control as possible. They aren’t completely happy with Obamacare as they experience it, but what they really want is the things that only government health care plans can deliver.

Here’s the heart of Altman’s piece:

They spoke anxiously about rising premiums, deductibles, copays and drug costs. They were especially upset by surprise bills for services they believed were covered. They said their coverage was hopelessly complex. Those with marketplace insurance — for which they were eligible for subsidies — saw Medicaid as a much better deal than their insurance and were resentful that people with incomes lower than theirs could get it. They expressed animosity for drug and insurance companies, and sounded as much like Bernie Sanders supporters as Trump voters. One man in Pennsylvania with Type 1 diabetes reported making frequent trips to Eastern Europe to purchase insulin at one-tenth the cost he paid here. Surveys show that most enrollees in the Affordable Care Act marketplaces are happy with their plans. The Trump voters in our focus groups were representative of people who had not fared as well. Several described their frustration with being forced to change plans annually to keep premiums down, losing their doctors in the process. But asked about policies found in several Republican plans to replace the Affordable Care Act — including a tax credit to help defray the cost of premiums, a tax-preferred savings account and a large deductible typical of catastrophic coverage — several of these Trump voters recoiled, calling such proposals “not insurance at all.” One of those plans has been proposed by Representative Tom Price, Mr. Trump’s nominee to be secretary of Health and Human Services. These voters said they did not understand health savings accounts and displayed skepticism about the concept. When told Mr. Trump might embrace a plan that included these elements, and particularly very high deductibles, they expressed disbelief. They were also worried about what they called “chaos” if there was a gap between repealing and replacing Obamacare. But most did not think that, as one participant put it, “a smart businessman like Trump would let that happen.” Some were uninsured before the Affordable Care Act and said they did not want to be uninsured again. Generally, the Trump voters on Medicaid were much more satisfied with their coverage.

These people aren’t representative of all Americans. But it’s a good illustration of an important principle: even people who supported one party aren’t necessarily thinking about this issue in the same kind of ideologically-driven terms that the party’s leaders are. They don’t have an ideological aversion to government involvement in health care; indeed, Medicaid looks like a great deal to them. They think Trump is going to do the right thing by them, because he’s a businessman and therefore he must be pragmatic.

Donald Trump has campaigned to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare, once he gets into office. Now that he's won the presidency with a majority Republican House and Senate, that feat might not prove to be too easy. Wonkblog's Max Ehrenfreund explains. (Daron Taylor/The Washington Post)

If we take ideology out of the picture for a moment, what are the things people really want out of their health care? At its most basic, people want coverage that is:

Simple

Affordable

Secure

Comprehensive

The ACA doesn’t succeed on all these fronts. It’s not simple, because it was essentially a gigantic kludge built on top of an impossibly complex system (and there are parts of the current system’s complexity that aren’t a direct result of the ACA, but which it gets blamed for anyway). If you’re buying coverage on the individual market you have to take a gamble on whether you won’t get sick this year and will therefore do better with a high deductible plan with lower premiums. You have to worry about copays and coinsurance and deductibles and in-network versus out-of-network costs, and a whole bunch of other things that are hard to understand and keep track of, even if you have an employer plan. Even though premium increases have been lower since the ACA took effect than they were before, people are troubled by all the out-of-pocket costs.

It’s critical to understand that the kind of things Republicans are considering will likely make getting insurance more complex. You’ll have to learn about how different Health Savings Accounts work, and what kind of gamble you might want to take on a catastrophic plan that covers very little and will lead to more out-of-pocket costs. It certainly won’t get easier, and while it may be more affordable for some people — especially the young and healthy who are lucky enough not to get sick or suffer an accident — it’s likely to be at least as expensive for most people, and probably more expensive. Republican plans are designed to make you pay more up front so you’ll shop around and (hopefully) costs will come down; it’s what they call “skin in the game.”

The ACA offers security, especially for those with pre-existing conditions, but Republican plans will take that away. Insurers will be able to bring back yearly and lifetime limits on coverage, so you’d better hope you don’t get a serious disease. Those with pre-existing conditions could find themselves shunted into high-risk pools, which will be underfunded and overpriced. And the comprehensive benefits required by the ACA will be gone.

So while the ACA satisfies some but not all of people’s important goals, the Republican plans really don’t satisfy any of them. They hope their plans will make things more affordable, but they certainly won’t be simple, they won’t be secure, and they won’t be comprehensive.

But you know what does satisfy all these basic criteria? Government plans, which is why the folks in the KFF focus groups are jealous of people whose incomes were low enough to get Medicaid. For starters, they’re simple. When you’re on Medicaid, you don’t have to do a complex risk assessment to figure out which plan might be better for you under different future circumstances. You just get Medicaid, and when you go to the doctor it’s paid for. Medicare has some premiums and cost-sharing, but compared to private insurance it’s pretty simple, and more affordable — which is why it’s so popular. Government programs are also secure — you can’t lose them, unless a Republican state or federal government succeeds in kicking you off. And while they might not cover every experimental procedure, they’re comprehensive enough to take care of most people’s needs.

President Obama and Vice President-elect Mike Pence each met with lawmakers from their parties, Jan. 4, to discuss plans for the Affordable Care Act. (Sarah Parnass/The Washington Post)

The fact that government health insurance is so popular vexes Republicans to no end. They try to convince people with an ideological argument — since Medicare is Big Government, it’s necessarily bad, and it would be better by definition if it were privatized. But people don’t buy that, because ideology is less important to them than whether their more practical criteria, like simplicity and security, are being satisfied.

It’s also important to keep in mind that you can acknowledge the weaknesses of the ACA, like its complexity, while still fighting like hell against repeal, which will be an absolute cataclysm. And when you’re designing policy you have to consider systemic goals (like bringing down overall health spending) alongside the way individuals are going to experience the system. But we shouldn’t forget that what regular people want out of health care isn’t the same as what politicians want.