Throw out the mummy and daddy manuals and ditch the philosophies – your kids will be fine and you will be happier

‘I think my child has been breastfed by another woman,” my friend Jennifer announces out of the blue in the middle of our kids’ play-date. Even for California, where we live, this is mind-bogglingly weird. For a start, Jennifer’s daughter Alice is two and a half. By British standards, it’s a little odd that even her own mother is still breastfeeding her, although living here I’m getting used to that kind of thing. But breastfeeding someone else’s child? A starving newborn trapped in a snowstorm maybe. But a pre-schooler whose mum has popped to the bank? I look over at Alice, so deceptively cute with her pigtails and pink sandals.

Adulterer, I think to myself.

Although the whole thing sounds like an ill-advised collaboration between the scriptwriters for Sex and the City and social services, it almost doesn’t surprise me. Increasingly these days, it seems that parenthood requires the adoption of a “parenting philosophy”, a quotable governing masterplan to build the perfect child.

For Jennifer’s friend, who decided to give her daughter a quick and inappropriate breast milk snack, it’s “attachment parenting” – a theory that has taken the loosely metaphorical use of the word “attachment”, as in “I am very attached to my new kitchen blender” or “a child must be well attached to its caregiver”, and unfathomably decided it should be applied totally literally, advocating that in order to grow up psychologically healthy, a child should spend as much of its early life as possible actually physically fettered to its parent (although for parent, read mother).

Attachment parents shun basic baby conveniences such as bottles, cots and buggies in favour of extended breastfeeding, co-sleeping and “babywearing”, an oddly politically charged way to describe carrying your baby in a sling. The whole philosophy is highly influential where we live, and perhaps as a result, our local parks are full of exhausted-looking women shackled to two-stone toddlers, and nobody has slept in months.

When we left the UK four years ago, the opposite philosophy prevailed. Gina Ford was the baby guru of choice and parents worried less about traumatising babies by putting them down, but somehow damaging them by “overhandling” them. In this worldview, good parents enforced rigid routines. Ford babies then grew up into Supernannyed toddlers, howling away their preschool years on the naughty step, while across the Atlantic, their American counterparts had their tantrums met with cuddles and praise (or even, as advised by one recent Californian parenting advice column I read, “a relaxing foot massage with invigorating essential oils”).

The philosophies themselves may be opposing, but what they share is a kind of absolutism, a high stakes alarmist tone, in which the consequences of not sticking to the script can be lifelong and dire.

In reality, whichever method you choose, your kids are overwhelmingly likely to turn out just fine. There is little evidence to suggest that any one loving parenting style has any particular advantage over any other, but still both of these basic parenting worldviews are firmly rooted in a kind of underlying terror.

For the routine-lovers it’s the fear that without a firm hand, a child will become coddled and dependent, lacking in resilience and unable to function in the real world. At the more cuddly end of the spectrum, it’s the heart-chilling anxiety that children are so psychologically fragile that without near constant attention they will suffer long-term emotional damage.

Fed by a multi-million dollar parenting industry eager to capitalise on these anxieties, heavily invested in scaremongering about the risks of failure to comply with their chosen method, this is parenthood at its most doctrinaire and unforgiving.

This climate of fear and catastrophising in which we are now parenting almost certainly goes some way towards explaining why, with surprising consistency, a large body of research shows that people who don’t have children are happier than people who do.

Oddly – or not oddly at all for those of us who have spent the past hour stuck in traffic with a toddler shouting “poo-poo nugget” on endless repeat – study after study has shown that people with children are less happy than the childless (or childfree as they call themselves, while ordering another round of margaritas).

One influential piece of research by the Nobel Prize winner Daniel Kahneman showed that a large sample group of women were happier while engaged in almost any given activity other than caring for their own children, including housework. In another particularly depressing study, a group of German academics found that the average drop in happiness in the two years following the birth of a first child is greater than that after divorce, unemployment and even the death of a partner.

For most parents, this is a deeply counterintuitive finding. Most of us would agree that our children have opened up an otherwise inaccessible capacity for joy in our lives. So perhaps it is not parenthood per se that is the problem, but the increasingly anxiety ridden and intense manner in which we are going about it.

Another unusual piece of research looked at the relationship between parental unhappiness and the “intensity” of parenting attitudes. The researchers asked a group of mothers of young children how strongly they agreed or disagreed with a range of statements such as “You the mother should always provide the best, most intellectually stimulating activities to aid in your child’s development,” and “It is harder to be a good mother than a corporate executive.” After controlling for confounding factors, the data showed that the more strongly a mother agreed with these statements, and the more “intense” her attitude towards parenting in general, the unhappier she became and the greater her risk of depression, with the most intense mothers experiencing depression at a rate more than three times the level in the general population.

This intensity in our approach to parenting is ramping up for almost everyone. Time-use surveys show that a mother now spends an average of four extra hours with her children every week than a mother in 1965, despite being far more likely to also work outside the home, while university-educated mothers put in a staggering extra nine hours. Much of this time is spent in what sociologists call “concerted cultivation” (think scrambling over a climbing frame two inches behind a four-year-old while maintaining an unbroken educational commentary about the park’s flora and fauna).

But we should be careful. By approaching parenting in this oddly intense manner, it seems that we are sucking the joy out of life’s most important relationship. Our time with our kids is precious and fleeting. Instead of consuming it with overthinking and anxiety about terrible things that will probably never happen, we would be better off just loving them, talking to them, enjoying them and letting them know us for who we really are. And keeping our boobs to ourselves.

• The Pursuit of Happiness and Why It’s Making Us Anxious by Ruth Whippman is published by Hutchinson, £14.99. To order a copy for £11.99, go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call the Guardian Bookshop on 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.