The military is arguably the most significant social institution in our country. More than a million Americans serve in the armed forces in some active or reserve capacity, and that doesn’t count the millions more civilian contractors and recent veterans and their families. To these Americans, the military isn’t just an organ of the national security state; it is a safety net, health care provider, employer, educator and landlord.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Despite its significance, it doesn’t touch all parts of our country equally. The Pew Research Center found that while a majority of older Americans had some family ties to the military, only a third of 18- to 29-year-olds did. This is partly geographic: The military relies heavily on recruits from rural areas and the South. Kids from the mid-Atlantic and Northeast, on the other hand, volunteer for service much less frequently.

But it’s also about class: Both extremely high- and low-income families are underrepresented, making military service especially common among the working- and middle-class voters who form the core of the Republican Party.

The transition after the Vietnam War to an all-volunteer force created the world’s finest professional military. But it also reinforced geographic and cultural divisions that reveal themselves in our voting. One recent paper found that in lower- and middle-income families, children with higher test scores are more likely to enlist, while the opposite held true for upper-income families. In communities like mine, we send our best and brightest to our armed forces. Our culture’s elites, on the other hand, encourage their children to do just about anything else.

To serve in the modern military — or to be the uncle, parent or sibling of one who does — is to treat the necessary service and sacrifice of war with a sacred honor. In my community, we pile into cars and drive hundreds of miles to watch our children’s graduation from basic training. We shed tears of sorrow when we drop them at the airport to go to war and tears of joy when we pick them up after they’ve returned unharmed. We take our brother to church and ask our pastor to pray for his safety. We fight on the phone with our wife’s health care provider at Veterans Affairs. We wonder whether that temper a friend developed in Afghanistan is evidence of a long-term mental health problem.

Admirably, most Americans have managed to separate their political feelings about a given conflict from their appreciation for those who served. But the chasm remains, even while most of our fellow citizens enthusiastically support the troops. They see our Middle East wars as political issues to understand and debate, not as the signal moment in the lives of the people they care most about.

Predictably, this division has also infected our political culture: One side loves our military and lives alongside it; the other party respects — even reveres — our men and women in uniform. Yet reverence and respect are poor substitutes for kinship, as Jim Webb himself learned about a year ago.

In a speech announcing that he had ended his long-shot bid for the nomination, Mr. Webb wondered aloud whether his views were consistent with the “power structure and the nominating base of the Democratic Party.” Hundreds of thousands — possibly millions — of working-class whites switched their votes from Barack Obama to Donald Trump. I suspect many of them thought the same thing when they went to the polls.