Here at TBD, decorating on a budget is what we do, and you can’t ask for more in “budget” ideas than a dollar! We love the idea of dollar store decorating, but we were skeptical. There is a lot of stuff out there that just seems a little too cutesy for our taste… and the idea of budget decorating isn’t to look “cheap”… it’s to make the most of what we have and spend the least amount we can making it work! So we perused Pinterest for days, and found some dollar store DIY projects that look great, are creative and really offer something for the home. So here it is, our take on dollar store decor! From ‘Soel Boutique’, this chalkboard platter is an easy project… tray from the dollar store, and chalkboard paint! This is cute! (The good kind of cute!)

‘Love of Family and Home‘ did the same project, but she gives a good tutorial on how she did it, and I keep thinking how you could create a group wall hanging with several of these, then spell out an inspirational saying with one work on each chalkboard…. or have a family center where each member has their own board to leave notes…

This dollar store wire cloche by ‘The Gathering Place’ is really cool… there is not way I would ever guess it’s a dollar store trash can! Check out their photos!

Make a DIY pebble welcome mat or placemats with vase pebbles and rubber mat… So easy, and they sell for $30-40 a piece at CB2! From ‘Curbly’.

Loving’ on this dollar store planter tutorial by ‘Craftberry Bush’!

This beach lantern tutorial is from Wendy at ‘Craft Goodies’, brought to us by ‘The Country Chic Cottage’. Made with picture frames and a few supplies from Lowes, this is such a cool craft for either indoors or out!

Paint the smooth side of plastic platters with acrylic paint… BHG recommends 2-3 coats. Then hang as wall art… this is a similar look to the ceiling medallion wall art that is so popular!

‘Dollar Store Crafts’ has a tutorial on making this Pottery Barn inspired dollar store mirror… glue gun and dollar store mirrors, and some foam core board! Yes!

‘Mod Podge Rocks‘ has a tutorial on making this “I Heart You” picture frame from a dollar store frame and some random craft and scrapbooking supplies! Easy and so cute!

Dollar store or thrift store frames with scrapbook or other pretty papers… Easy!

‘The Frugal Homemaker‘ took these vinyl inspirational quotes…

And turned them into this!

‘Hi Sugar Plum’ shows you how to make these DIY mirror boxes with a quick tutorial. I found these as mirrored candle bases at the Dollar Tree. A little bit of inexpensive glamour!

‘The Creativity Exchange’ created this DIY gold leaf vase… inexpensive treasure!

Lastly, ‘How Does She?‘ shows us how she made these frames with Mod Podge! I really think these are all the right shades of cute… I like how the hook and eyes gave it a little bit of an industrial look…

These inexpensive dollar store decorating DIY”s cost less than a cup of coffee, yet aren’t “cheap” looking. Want more? Try our post on classy DIY dollar store projects!





SaveSave