In 1988, when Chris Rock had been doing standup comedy for four years, he took part in a special called “Comedy’s Dirtiest Dozen.” The producer’s idea was to gather together performers who were too shocking for the mainstream: Rock’s co-stars included Tim Allen, who hadn’t yet tamed his horny-Neanderthal act for television, and Bill Hicks, who presented antisocial rants as psychedelic parables. But even in this group Rock’s youth and acerbity and race made him stand out; the m.c. introduced him as “the Nat Turner of comedy.” Rock was a high-school dropout who had recently become one of Eddie Murphy’s protégés. After the two men met in a comedy club, Murphy gave him a six-hundred-dollar bit part in “Beverly Hills Cop II.” Rock strode onstage looking much younger than his twenty-three years: a bucktoothed kid with a multicolored leather jacket, a Jheri-curled flattop, and state-of-the-art Air Jordan III sneakers. “I was born a suspect,” he said, looking at the audience as if expecting a fight: Came out my mother’s stomach; anything that happened in a three-block radius, I was a suspect! White America is so scared of black teen-agers. I walk down the streets, women are grabbing hold of their Mace, everybody’s tucking in their chains, people are hitting their car doors, people get into karate stances. I look up in the air, there’s a bunch of old white ladies on the phone—they’ll dial nine-one and just wait for me to do something. His routine, barely six minutes long, was alternately rebellious and raunchy—the highlight was an absurd story about masturbating to the image on a box of Aunt Jemima pancake mix. Rock ended with an impudent gesture that any hip-hop fan would have recognized: he tossed the microphone onto the stage and walked off. That performance helped earn him a place in the cast of “Saturday Night Live,” two years later, and that attitude helped make him the defining comic of the hip-hop generation. “You can watch Eddie Murphy and go, This guy really loves R. & B. music,” Rock says. “You can watch Bill Cosby and it’s, like, This guy is jazz. If you watch me, it’s Ice Cube, Run-D.M.C.” Rock is forty-nine now, and in the years since that early routine he has upgraded his hair (natural, neat) and his teeth (whiter, straighter), while downgrading his sneakers—he likes cheap, plain black Chuck Taylors. Otherwise, he doesn’t look much different from the way he did back then. He has the same scrawny body and the same trebly voice, an infectious instrument that sounds even better when gently distorted, guitarlike, by a P.A. system. “The standup thing is a calling,” he says. Every few years, he works up a new hour of material, takes it on tour, and then turns it into an HBO special, which wipes the slate clean—according to a prevailing comedian’s code, every joke you tell on television is one you can no longer tell onstage. He uses the time between tours to work on other projects, and to give himself a chance to start missing the presence of a microphone and a crowd. “Part of me gets a little bored with standup sometimes,” he says. “It’s like any kid: you get really good at a video game—what’s the next game?” It was a Tuesday afternoon in Manhattan, and Rock had found his favorite table in the Mandarin Oriental’s Lobby Lounge, thirty-five floors above Central Park. He has been married since 1996 to Malaak Compton-Rock, a publicist turned philanthropist, and they have settled in New Jersey with their two daughters, who are never far from Rock’s mind. On this day, the older one had to get from school to volleyball practice, and the younger one, home sick after an asthma attack, called to prescribe herself a Frappuccino, which he agreed to procure. Rock had spent most of the morning at his office, a few blocks away, working on his other career, the one that keeps him busy between standup tours. Almost from the start, Rock supplemented his comedy jobs with acting work; one of his first major roles came in 1991, with “New Jack City,” in which he played Pookie, a crack addict whose craving was so strong that it made his whole body vibrate. (This was not a comic role, at least in theory.) He has often been called upon to help make other people’s movies funnier, but with his new film, “Top Five,” for which he served as both writer and director, he gave himself the kind of role he has never had: the leading man in a movie strong enough to finally convince his fans that he is no longer just a standup. The notion that there’s anything “just” about being a great comedian has irritated Rock for years. In 1997, talking with Eric Bogosian for the Times , he complained that standup was “the lowest medium in all of show business, in levels of respect.” No one ever suggests that a successful director branch out into standup comedy, so as not to be considered “just” a filmmaker. Still, Rock has never been satisfied with a life devoted purely to standup comedy, and “Top Five” is both an expression and a satire of the urge, common among professionally funny people, to be taken more seriously. Rock plays Andre Allen, a famous comedic actor trying in vain to create interest in his new film, “Uprize,” an earnest, misbegotten epic about the Haitian Revolution. One of Rock’s inspirations was “Stardust Memories,” the 1980 Woody Allen movie, in which Allen played Sandy Bates, a comic director who was sick of comedy. Early on, Rock has Andre repurpose Sandy Bates’s best-known line. “I don’t feel funny,” he moans, and he spends the rest of the movie—which unfolds in New York, in the course of a day—explaining himself to a Times reporter, played by Rosario Dawson, while simultaneously coming to his senses, or trying to. “Top Five” began quietly. Rock didn’t tell many people that he was writing it, and he shot it independent of any studio; the cast was augmented by comedians he considers to be friends, a group that evidently includes nearly all of them. The movie had its première at the Toronto International Film Festival, in September, where it inspired a standing ovation and, more important, an informal auction, which was won by Paramount. The studio reportedly paid twelve and a half million dollars for the rights to distribute “Top Five,” and promised to spend twenty million more promoting it, with some help from its star. In all this, Rock’s partner was the powerful producer Scott Rudin, who has become his motivator and protector. Rudin likes to think of “Top Five” as a risky bet that paid off. “This movie is a version of daring yourself,” he said one afternoon, during a meeting with Rock. “Because it’s not what has ever been your movie sweet spot.” Rock laughed. “I don’t really have a movie sweet spot,” he said. Rudin didn’t quite agree. Part of the problem, as he saw it, was that Rock had indeed carved out a role for himself in Hollywood, but a limited one. “Realistically, you’ve been in a lot of Adam Sandler movies,” he said. “You’ve been that guy, and there’s always a guy like that in the movie business, the reliable funny guy next to the guy at the center. But it’s not enough.” “No,” Rock said. “It’s not enough.” Rock wrote the script while on the set of one of those Adam Sandler movies, “Grown Ups 2,” the second installment of a somewhat lackadaisical and very profitable franchise. “I’m No. 3 on the call sheet: Sandler, Kevin James, and me,” he said, then reconsidered. “I might even have been four”—behind Salma Hayek, who played Sandler’s wife. “Which means I had so many days off.” He was staying in a rented waterfront house, which he turned into a one-man writer’s retreat. “I’m literally looking at the ocean, like fuckin’ Hemingway, writing longhand,” he said. Time spent on the set also gave Rock a chance to consider the successful career of Sandler, who has been one of his best friends since the nineteen-eighties, when they both worked at the Comic Strip, on the Upper East Side. “He had the confidence of a black wide receiver,” Rock said, admiringly. In the nineteen-nineties, “Adam Sandler movie” became not just a description but a genre, and an industry. “That’s something I needed to learn from him,” Rock said. “He does his movie amazingly . O.K., what’s a Chris Rock movie?”

One of Rock’s many previous attempts to achieve film stardom was “Down to Earth,” a surprisingly wan 2001 reinterpretation of “Heaven Can Wait,” about an aspiring African-American comedian who dies and then returns to earth in the body of an old white millionaire. Near the end, when Rock’s character finally gets his racial identity back, he tests it out by trying and failing to hail a cab. “I’m black again!” he cries, exultant, as it speeds off. “I’m a black man! Thank God I’m a black man!” “We ought to send PBS some money so it can afford better pledge-break specials.” In one of the first scenes in “Top Five,” Rock updates and improves the joke. “Black man, trying to get a cab in New York City,” Andre says to Dawson’s character, extending his arm, hoping to enlighten her about the realities of race in America. Just then, the punch line arrives, in the form of a taxi skidding to a stop. Rock knows that his films, unlike his standup routines, haven’t generally met with rapturous enthusiasm, although some of them might be described as cult classics. “CB4” (1993), which he helped write and produce, was a low-budget hip-hop answer to “This Is Spinal Tap,” anchored by a series of loving pastiches. And “Pootie Tang,” a Rock production about a black superhero who speaks only in gibberish, became a kind of cultural touchstone partly because it was so energetically reviled upon its release, in 2001. (Pootie’s legend lives on in the hip-hop lyrics of Cam’ron, Big Sean, and Kanye West.) But the first two films that Rock directed were neither big hits nor brave misses. In 2003, he re-imagined “The Candidate” as “Head of State,” playing an ingenuous Everyman who finds himself running for President—one of the last “black President” fantasies to arrive before real life intervened. And in 2007 he remade the beloved French film “Chloe in the Afternoon” as “I Think I Love My Wife,” a rather sour romantic comedy. Often, he has taken smaller roles in other people’s movies, cast on the correct assumption that audiences will be happy to see and hear him, even if he doesn’t have a lot to do or say. As a standup, Rock is verbally brash but physically restrained—“People like to see me composed ,” he says—and his stage movements are mainly limited to pacing, pointing, and squinting. In films, he can seem inert, as if, in the effort to shed his characteristic comic fervor, he has accidentally shed too much. As he wrote “Top Five,” Rock realized that he didn’t have to create an entirely new persona: he could become a memorable protagonist by rewriting his own life, following the example of Woody Allen, his hero, and also of Louis C.K., the comedian who plays a comedian in his acclaimed anti-sitcom, “Louie.” (He and Rock are friends and frequent collaborators. Louis C.K. wrote and directed “Pootie Tang” and co-wrote “I Think I Love My Wife.”) In “Top Five,” Rock plays not an Everyman but a celebrity, often surrounded by an ambient chorus of passersby shouting “Andre!” or, worse, “Hammy!,” the name of a crime-fighting bear that has become his signature character. Naturally, Andre Allen’s guarded skepticism fades in the presence of a beautiful and tenacious journalist. As the interview evolves into a date, and then into a disaster, Andre becomes increasingly expressive, and Rock is increasingly called upon to act. In the course of filming, Rudin engaged the services of Larry Moss, a prominent coach, to help Rock stop being a director—and, for that matter, a comedian—when he was on camera. “Sometimes when people think, they hold their breath,” Moss says. “And he’s a big thinker. So I kept saying, ‘Breathe, Chris. Don’t think. Stop and feel the floor.’ ” On set, whenever someone complimented Rock’s performance in a scene he responded with cheerful self-deprecation: “Just trying to stay in show business.” Unlike Andre Allen, Rock doesn’t have a signature character so popular that he never has to work again, although he does provide the voice of Marty, the zebra, in the three “Madagascar” films. He is a working comic who needs to keep working. “I’ve never made money like Eddie,” he said. “I’ve done fine, but it’s dribs and drabs: two here, one there. I never got, like, a thirty-million-dollar check. I never had a movie make three hundred million dollars that’s just starring me. So I don’t necessarily do it for the money—but I’ve never had so much money I don’t have to think about it.” He sometimes describes “Top Five” as his last chance to get it right. “It was, like, O.K., if this doesn’t work I can definitely see no one letting me direct a movie again,” he said. “I had to think that was a possibility. I mean, how many times can you not have a hit?” He searched for a suitable analogy. “I used to go see Christian Slater movies,” he said, shrugging. “They don’t really have them anymore.” During a couple of hours in the hotel lounge, Rock was approached only once, by a young girl, evidently a tourist, who ran near enough to confirm that it was really him and then retreated. But, when he descended to Sixtieth Street, his life became a bit more like Andre Allen’s. He had to get back to New Jersey, and there was no sign of the Uber car he’d ordered. “Uber fuckin’ does this shit,” he said, inspecting the map on his phone. There was a high school nearby, and teen-agers were streaming toward the subway. “Yo, Chris Rock!” one guy shouted. “Say a joke for me or something, man!” “Every day,” Rock muttered, without looking up from his phone. He approached a hotel doorman. “I’m going to Jersey,” he said. “Get me a car, I’ll give him a hundred bucks.” There were half a dozen idling town cars, but all of them already had assignments. “Motherfucker!” he said, to no one in particular. Finally, a yellow cab appeared, and after a brief negotiation—cabbies aren’t typically eager to cross the Hudson River—Rock got in and the taxi drove off.

In 1993, after three undistinguished years on “Saturday Night Live,” Rock left and joined its black-oriented rival, “In Living Color,” which was cancelled not long after he arrived. By then, the cutting edge of black comedy had moved to HBO, which had created a popular showcase for emerging African-American comedians called “Def Comedy Jam.” The series was helping to make new stars, like Steve Harvey and Chris Tucker, and Rock felt left out. “I was, like, ‘These are the new black comedians, and I’m not a part of this shit? Fuck that .’ ” He got himself booked as a guest host, in the hope that, despite his years on “Saturday Night Live,” home of the white comedy élite, his young African-American fans would continue to think of him as their own. He still pays special attention to black audiences. Earlier this year, for instance, he hosted the BET Awards, a ceremony that is both less prestigious and, possibly as a consequence, more entertaining than the Oscars, which Rock hosted in 2005. “There’s not a lot of black stars without a black following,” he says. “You’ve got to have that bottom, or else you’re just rudderless.” Rock tends to shoot his comedy specials in front of predominantly black crowds, which gives him license to say things that might resonate differently in rooms full of white people. He recorded part of his début album at a black-owned comedy club in Atlanta, and one bit started with Rock looking around the room. “Lotta weaves,” he said. “What’s up with that shit?” There was an explosion of howling laughter—he scarcely needed to say more, though of course he did. A few years ago, he turned this observation into a wry documentary, “Good Hair,” about the art and science of caring for black women’s hair. During an episode of “The Oprah Winfrey Show” that featured the film, an African-American woman stood up to protest. “When other races see the movie, they’re going to laugh—but they’re laughing at us,” she said. “You’re telling everything about us. We just want to keep some secrets.” Rock’s defense was rooted in autobiography. He grew up in a working-class family in Bedford-Stuyvesant, the son of a New York Daily News delivery-truck driver, and from the age of seven he was bused to a school in Gerritsen Beach, a largely Irish-American and Italian-American neighborhood on the southern edge of Brooklyn. (“Ain’t nothing scarier than poor white people,” he once said.) He often talks about being bullied, an experience that taught him how to navigate a cultural divide, and also what a luxury it is not to have to. “All the art I do is mostly black,” he told the woman on “Oprah. ” “It’s for everybody, but it involves mostly black people, because I’m black. And Adam Sandler’s Jewish, and a lot of his stuff focusses on Jewish people.” He sounded slightly, and uncharacteristically, rattled. “I don’t have a television camera or a movie theatre that only shows to black people,” he said. “If I did, I would.” There have been times when Rock worried about being left behind. Not long after he departed “S.N.L.,” he was shown up one night in Chicago by his opening act, Martin Lawrence, whose extraordinarily expressive storytelling inspired an outsized reaction in an audience that was supposed to be there for Rock. (He told Vanity Fair, “It was like watching somebody fuck your wife with a bigger dick.”) The critic and filmmaker Nelson George, who has worked with Rock for decades, remembers that era as one of reinvention. Rock knew that he excelled at writing jokes, but he resolved to get better at telling them, so he built a rehearsal space in his Brooklyn carriage house, with mirrors on the walls, to practice his physical performance. “Everyone remarks on him stalking the stage,” George says. “That was a very conscious thing: ‘How do I create more energy?’ ” “Does flannel go with camo?” When Rock reëmerged, he had a bolder, more theatrical style, and jokes that more precisely captured his point of view, which is broad-minded but skeptical. (Years after that night in Chicago, Lawrence saw Rock perform in California and paid him a very specific compliment: “You got so many topics!”) Rock’s career began anew in 1996, with the release of a perfectly crafted hour-long HBO special called “Bring the Pain,” which includes perhaps the most startling riff in the history of American comedy. “There’s, like, a civil war going on with black people, and there’s two sides,” he said. “There’s black people. There’s niggas. And niggas have got to go . Every time black people want to have a good time, ign’ant-ass niggas fuck it up.” What followed was a profane indictment, perfectly balanced between comic frustration and tragic anger. “Niggas always want some credit for some shit they’re supposed to do,” Rock said: A nigga will say some shit like “I take care of my kids.” You’re supposed to, you dumb motherfucker! What are you talking about? What are you bragging about? Kinda ignorant shit is that? “I ain’t never been to jail!” What you want, a cookie? You’re not supposed to go to jail, you low-expectation-having motherfucker! All this was palatable, if you found it palatable (and some didn’t), because Rock declined to present it as anything more than the splenetic observation of a guy who was a little older and a lot richer than he used to be—a guy, you suspected, who saw his relatives, and maybe even himself, reflected on both sides of that civil war. An intemperate rebuke about shiftless “niggas” sounded much more ambiguous, and much funnier, coming from the so-called Nat Turner of comedy. The “black people” vs. “niggas” routine established Rock not just as a great comedian, which is indisputable, but as a potential political spokesman, a role he has rejected ever since. “You’ve never seen me on a political show,” he says. “You’ve never seen me talk about an issue.” But he knows that part of what audiences love about him is his willingness to tell unpopular truths; where more confessional comedians reveal secrets about their lives, he aims to reveal secrets about ours. This means that his act requires a steady supply of unpopular truths to tell, and finding them can take a while. “You get to a point where it’s, like, I’ve said everything,” he says. “You want the world to change, and you want to change—you don’t want to be the same guy.”

It has been six years since Rock’s last special, “Kill the Messenger,” and so, even while finishing “Top Five,” he has been making occasional forays to comedy clubs to work on his new set. On a recent Friday night, Rock turned up at the Comedy Cellar, in Greenwich Village, where Estee Adoram, the club’s longtime booker, is always happy to squeeze him into the schedule. Colin Quinn, a friend from the early days, was there, having just performed. “Good shit, man,” Rock said, and asked Quinn about his girlfriend. “You going to marry her?” “Aw, leave me alone,” Quinn said, fondly, before making an escape. Rock installed himself at a table marked “Reserved” in the restaurant, upstairs, and ordered some French fries, a Coke, and a chocolate milkshake. He had with him some sheets of cardboard—the remnants of notebooks whose pages had long ago been ripped out—covered with brief phrases. This is how he writes down his routines, using a technique borrowed from his paternal grandfather, who was a cabdriver during the week and a preacher on the weekends; the idea is to always be talking, instead of reading. He managed to eat a few fries before Adoram gave him a cue, and he hopped down a narrow staircase in the back just in time to hear the m.c. say his name, and to hear the audience react with stunned jubilation. “It’s not going to be that good—not at these prices,” he said, when he got to the low stage. (Admission was twenty-four dollars, plus a minimum of two items from the menu.) “At these prices, I could leave right now!” He imagined the reviews: “Chris Rock came out and he left—it was good! He didn’t tell any jokes, but it was good!” When Rock goes on tour, he is conscious of giving the audience a show: a sharp suit, a crisp set, a ferocious attitude. But on nights like this, when he is testing out material, he changes his body language in an attempt to create the conditions for a clinical trial: he wants to find out which jokes work even when he’s not selling them. He slumps against the back wall, fidgets with the microphone stand, pauses to examine his paperless notebooks. “It’s a gym,” he likes to say—a place to work out, not to show off. He looked out at the crowd, speaking mainly to himself: “What am I going to talk about?” “What about Business—which branch is that?” There was plenty: a long bit about religion and a short one about bullying, and also a withering take on the alleged coolness of President Obama. “Obama’s, like, cool compared to other politicians—but not as cool as actual cool people,” he said. “Like, Miles Davis would kick Obama in the fuckin’ teeth!” Someone suggested that he say something about the new iPhone, but Rock preferred to consider Ray Rice and Chris Brown, two of the many celebrities who have been caught behaving badly in the years since Rock last toured. “People say there’s no reason to ever hit a woman,” he said. “No—there’s no reason to ever hit a woman first . You can hit a woman back—shit, if Oprah hit me I’d knock her the fuck out!” The absurd image gave the crowd permission to laugh at an idea that it didn’t necessarily endorse, and Rock pressed on, recalling the media coverage of Brown’s assault on Rihanna, who was then his girlfriend. “No one ever asked the question ‘Who hit first?’ ” he said. “Best journalists in the world, not one asked the question. ‘It’s not important.’ Yes, it is! It’s the most important question on earth.” The laughter was dying down. “The United States bombed fuckin’ Japan,” he said. “We killed so many people—like, twelve 9/11s on one day. Because they hit first,” he said. “We’re bombing up Syria—they cut off two people’s heads!” His voice was getting higher and more insistent—he sounded about seventy per cent earnest. “We’re going to kill hundreds of thousands of people! And it’s O.K.!” He got quiet, and the laughter returned, as the audience warmed to the punch line: “Because they hit first.” After about fifteen minutes onstage, he walked through the crowd and upstairs to his table, where a waiter brought back his half-eaten French fries and half-finished milkshake. “There’s no rich way to do standup,” he said. “You’ve got to go to the same club you started at, be around the same bunch of guys you knew twenty-five years ago. You’re going to go onstage, and they’re either going to laugh or they’re not. They’ll give you about six minutes because you’re famous. And then you’re back to square one.”

As much as possible, Rock moves through the city as if he were not famous. “The average guy that’s been in as many movies as I have been in—and is black, or whatever—would have three people outside that door,” he said, one afternoon, after arriving unaccompanied for a meeting. “The driver downstairs would have a walkie-talkie, and they would correspond: ‘O.K., we’re moving him downstairs.’ No disrespect to anybody, but my heroes were different. Woody Allen doesn’t walk around with a bunch of random people, you know what I mean?” Rock doesn’t think of himself as unusually funny. “I’m not the funniest person I know,” he says. “I’m not the tenth-funniest person I know. I wasn’t the funniest guy on my block. I wasn’t the funniest guy in the clubs.” To compensate, he says, he had to outwork everyone else. “My nickname for him is the Duke of Doubt,” Nelson George says. “He’s not someone who revels in his successes. He’s already contemplating the next argument, the next thing that could go wrong.” For many people who knew Rock, his underwhelming film career was something of a running joke. George remembers that filmmaker friends of his used to say, “We love Chris, but he really shouldn’t direct anymore.” The comic and writer Neal Brennan, the co-creator of “Chappelle’s Show,” has known Rock for more than a decade, and served as a consultant on “Top Five.” He says that for years he was puzzled by the disjunction between Rock’s meticulously written standup sets and his seemingly tossed-off movies—everything he wrote, produced, or directed had been, essentially, a high-concept remake. “He likes being blue-collar: he likes that his dad was blue-collar, and he brought that blue-collar ethic to standup,” Brennan says. “But he never brought that blue-collar ethic to movies. This is the first time. And he did it—he’ll hate me for saying this—because Scott Rudin made him.” Rudin and Rock became close four years ago, after Rudin approached him with what sounded like a bad idea: to play a lead role in a new play called “The Motherfucker with the Hat,” by Stephen Adly Guirgis, which would make its début on Broadway. “It read like something he’d written,” Rudin says. “You read it, you couldn’t help hearing the words come from his mouth.” Rock’s character, Ralph, was a recovering alcoholic, a seeming beacon of good sense who slowly reveals himself to be a cold-blooded opportunist. The director, Anna D. Shapiro, hesitated to cast Rock, but was worn down first by Rudin’s enthusiasm and then by Rock’s willingness to audition, and by his commitment to developing a different kind of stage presence. “Chris is used to making eye contact with the audience,” Shapiro says. “The audience shifts and changes, and he rides that.” In rehearsal, she sometimes had to admonish him for looking at her—he needed to learn to resist his habit of reading the room. “You may approach the giant novelty chair.” It was a difficult production—Guirgis kept rewriting all the way through the previews—but the critical notice, during the play’s four-month run, was mainly kind. For Rock, the experience was transformative: he was impressed by Guirgis’s ability to write new lines every day, and by his own ability to learn them and then deliver them only a few hours later. (As a standup, Rock typically doesn’t say anything in a theatre that he hasn’t already said, hundreds of times, in a small club.) The play helped him realize that a dramatic project could be as difficult, and as rewarding, as standup. “I think when Chris came to do ‘Motherfucker’ he was sleepwalking, a little bit, in his life,” Shapiro says. By the time the play was finished, Rock was ready to work just as hard on a film. Rudin says, “I’d always thought Chris was a good director. I didn’t always agree with the choice of material.” For “Top Five,” he urged Rock to present himself as a star. “Don’t make yourself a nerdy guy in glasses,” he said. (In “I Think I Love My Wife,” Rock played the investment banker Richard Cooper—a nerdy guy in glasses.) Rudin’s hope was to recapture the rebellious spirit of Rock’s early standup routines. He said, “What can we do that’s as fuck-off as who you were then? What’s the forty-nine-year-old version of dropping the mike?” In “Top Five,” as in the previous movies Rock has directed, his character is choosing between two women: a thoughtful journalist, played by Dawson, and a reality star, played by Gabrielle Union. It is in some ways a kindhearted story, but Union’s character—glamorous and unsentimental—could be the subject of one of Rock’s less sparing routines about women. “I don’t have a talent,” Union laments, at one point, and it’s not entirely clear whether we’re meant to pity her, laugh at her, or both. Near the end of “Top Five,” Andre Allen makes his way to the Comedy Cellar, and the character and the actor become indistinguishable. Rock used to save his best jokes for his standup—in “Down to Earth,” he played a struggling comedian whose material, unfortunately, made his situation seem quite believable. He says, “This is the first movie I just said, ‘Fuck it—I’ll write other standup jokes.’ ” Shapiro, the theatre director, saw an early draft, and she remembers Rock asking if she had any suggestions. “I said, ‘Yeah, can you take out the stupid jokes about gay people? Or the stupid jokes about fat people?’ And he was, like, ‘No—but I’ll take a look at them.’ ” The jokes stayed in, and at a recent preview screening they earned roaring responses.