Lauren Gundlach and her father, Claus Gundlach, wading through floodwaters toward their damaged home in the Energy Corridor neighborhood of Houston, Texas, on Friday.

Lauren Gundlach and her father, Claus Gundlach, wading through floodwaters toward their damaged home in the Energy Corridor neighborhood of Houston, Texas, on Friday.

Hurricane Harvey dumped more rain than any other storm in American history , but now most of Houston is dry. Only certain pockets of the city, some of which were built inside floodplains and reservoirs, are still underwater; as the reservoirs continue to spill into the bayous, anywhere that hasn’t drained by now is likely to remain flooded for weeks. In these areas, there are still occasional rescues of people by boat—stubborn holdouts, living above the water line, are gradually running out of food—but most of the boats are used to grab essential medication, pets, family heirlooms, a change of clothes.

When Hurricane Katrina hit New Orleans, in 2005, the storm lasted two days. As a parable, however, it has lasted ever since. The vast majority of deaths and damage were suffered by poor people, who lived in low-lying areas that were quickly flooded when levees and dams were breached. Twelve years later, geography is destiny in Houston, too. But, in what may be America’s most diverse city, the outcomes have been more various. The immediate destruction—so far, Harvey has killed forty-seven people, compared with Katrina’s eighteen hundred—has been spread among classes and races.

Yesterday morning, I stood at the flood line on Memorial Drive, which is sandwiched between the Addicks Reservoir and Buffalo Bayou. A group of locals gathered in a parking lot, waiting for boats. One man sat next to empty animal crates; he was hoping to retrieve his sister’s cats. A Ford F-250 pulled up, with a motorboat in tow, and out climbed Claus Gundlach, a tall German executive in the steel industry with silver hair and a long, handsome face. He and his three daughters had come to help a neighbor collect valuables that she had abandoned a few days earlier. Suspected looters had been spotted nearby; a man named Carl Webb, who has stocked up on food and weapons and has no plans to leave home, told me that, after he threatened to shoot them, they sped away in a flat-bottom boat with a two-hundred-horsepower engine.

Gundlach’s boat was useless: the slope on Memorial Drive was too shallow to launch from the parking lot, and backing the truck in to an acceptable depth would put its exhaust pipe underwater. Dressed in fishing waders, and carrying several empty plastic tubs, he invited me to follow him on foot. The water was brown and stank of raw sewage. Plant leaves were coated in a nasty, fibrous film. “Officially, we’re not supposed to be here, because the water is so contaminated,” Gundlach said.

We turned left onto Legend Lane, past a sunken Porsche Cayenne, and eventually reached the house of a woman named Mary. Her dining-room chairs were stacked on a table. Shoes floated down the hallways. The electricity was off, but in the kitchen a battery-powered clock was ticking on the wall. On the back porch, an armadillo had taken shelter in a flowerpot.

Inside the study, as Mary sifted through files, I asked her about a large, framed photograph, which leaned against some boxes on the ground. It was an old portrait of a young girl. Mary turned around. “That’s—that’s my mother,” she said. Her voice quivered, and she began to shudder. “She was born in San Antonio. It was a childhood photo. I forgot to rescue that.” Water had filled the bottom third of the frame. “It’s like losing her all over again.”

Upstairs, Mary’s daughter Alexis, who is twenty-eight, was in her bedroom, trying to decide which clothes to salvage. Gundlach’s eldest daughter, Celeste, was helping her.

“What about the shoes under here?” Celeste asked.

Alexis demurred.

“Are you sure?” Celeste asked. “‘Cause these look pretty fancy. These look like Vegas shoes.”

“I’m not going to take those to Vegas.”

“You’re not?”

“I mean, I guess,” Alexis said. “Throw them in there.” She turned to me, and said, “When the water came in, all I packed was my Lululemon and my Louboutins.”

A few minutes later, Alexis noticed a large tray of silver cutlery on the stairs. “Mom, do you want to take the silver, or do you want to leave it here?” she asked.

“Take the silver.”

Celeste started to lift it. “Dear God,” she said, struggling with the weight.

“Celeste does crossfit, so she’s fit for hurricane rescues,” Alexis joked.

“My arms are shaking,” Celeste said.

Alexis grabbed her Ashley Black FasciaBlaster, a small bar with claw-like knobs, which is used to knead out cellulite, and we went outside. “If you don’t have a sense of humor about it—” she said, and trailed off.

“You’ll have a nervous breakdown,” Mary said, completing her daughter’s sentence. “Mother Nature doesn’t discriminate between economic classes. And she always wins.”