Ms. Uddo dropped out of college to become a model of the more traditional variety when a telephone psychic suggested it. (If that sounds like unorthodox career coaching … well, Ms. Uddo grew up on a California commune and also employs a psychic for her dog and cat.) But at 5-foot-6, she was too short for most jobs. Then one day her agent asked if she had nice hands and sent her on a call for OPI nail polish. She got the job.

The work can be tedious. She can’t text or read because often two manicurists work on her simultaneously. The process is repeated for up to 15 nail looks in a day.

“Luckily I’m a double Libra, so I can space out pretty easily,” said Ms. Uddo, who divides her time between the Chelsea neighborhood in Manhattan and Malibu, Calif., where her husband of eight years lives.

Some hand models baby their hands, wearing armorlike gloves and keeping their arms raised to avoid bloating. (For George Costanza on “Seinfeld,” oven mitts did the trick.) But Ms. Uddo considers herself a “rebel hand model,” even hiking, a favorite pastime. She does admit to moving slowly and deliberately so as not to break a nail, avoiding cooking and limiting caffeine so her hands don’t shake on tight close-ups. She moisturizes with an all-natural lotion she makes herself and met a reporter for tea wearing fingerless gloves, which she kept on indoors.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ms. Uddo said she wonders how long she can keep up a bicoastal existence (most jobs for “fashion hands” are in New York) and is working at bringing her lotion to market. She’s practicing her pitch (“It’s an all-in-one lotion!”), which includes putting an empowering spin on her work.

“We women can be hard on ourselves, but every woman should be able to find some part of her that she most likes,” Ms. Uddo said. “That’s kind of all you need in this business.”

A Hand Model’s Beauty Regimen

Photo

Adele Uddo never fully dries her hands because it’s better to moisturize — something she does about 10 times a day — when the skin is still damp. She uses a concoction of coconut and vitamin E oils with shea and jojoba butters that she whips up in her kitchen. When she’s not using her homemade product, she likes Weleda (her mother had her use it as a child) and a lotion called Luxe by Ladybug Jane (a vegan line).

Photo

She avoids acrylics and gels (“too drying”) and likes Sally Hansen Hard as Nails nail treatment. If she needs a quickie manicure (not all clients have manicurists on set), she’s perfectly happy at her local QQ Nails. Her nail shape of choice: oval or almond, because squared tips are prone to jagged edges and breakage.

Photo

She moisturizes her feet with her homemade lotion and exfoliates once a week with Dr. Bronner’s soap and a foot file. She avoids wearing heels that aren’t wedges, though she occasionally breaks that rule for stilettos on a night out. “I’m kind of a wimp,” she said. “I won’t walk even five blocks in them.” She also gets pedicures at QQ.

Ms. Uddo swears by a sulfur supplement called Sulfurzyme, which she is convinced makes hair and nails grow thicker and stronger. Keratin, the tough protein that’s a huge component of hair and nails, is high in sulfur.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For her lips, Ms. Uddo likes Badger lip balm, available at Whole Foods, and sometimes just uses olive oil or coconut butter. “I feel more comfortable personally when I know I can eat a product,” she said.