If you haven't noticed, being healthy is all the rage right now. Just look at Instagram, where conspicuous consumption is increasingly swathed in Lululemon and dusted with bee pollen. Scroll the feeds and you're as likely to see someone sipping a turmeric latte as a glass of champagne. Well is the new wealthy.

The mainstream success of juice bars and athleisure leggings has given rise to a new wave of ways to sell wellness. Sleek meditation studios are cropping up across the country; self-help services dot the amenities lists at fancy resorts; "wellness real estate" is a thing now (see also: Goop's exalted and derided wellness summit). Taken at face value, a popular emphasis on wellness—not just passing a physical, but attending to a holistic definition of well-being—is a good thing. But as commoditization naturally expands, capturing new customers and more dollars, one has to wonder about diminishing returns for those who can afford to pay up, and barriers to access for those who can't.

When wellness is sold as a carefully curated accessory—a domain of excess dominated by opportunistic marketers and designed (and priced) almost exclusively for the privileged—it risks becoming first and foremost a status symbol, and as such may fail to deliver on its healthy promises.

Like Sex, Wellness Sells.

According to the Global Wellness Institute, a nonprofit research and educational resource for the wellness industry, the global wellness market grew 10.6 percent to $3.72 trillion from 2013 to 2015 (latest figures available), while the global economy shrank 3.6 percent over the same period. GWI senior researchers Katherine Johnston and Ophelia Yeung say, “The growth trajectory of the wellness industry appears unstoppable.” Leading this global wellness juggernaut? The U.S. Earning the GWI's distinction of the world’s top “wellness nation,” America ranks number one for spending in four of the five market segments GWI tracks: spas, workplace wellness, wellness tourism, and wellness real estate. (We're among the top 15 when it comes to thermal and mineral springs.)

Among the main factors contributing to the growth, the report cites "an increasing consumer interest in all things related to maintaining and improving health driven by aging, a rising global epidemic of chronic disease and stress, the negative health impacts of environmental degradation, and the failure of the 'sick-care' medical model to improve quality of life."

The report also gives credit to "a collective, growing awareness among a subset of (more educated and affluent) consumers that their choices convey meaning, purpose, and impact." It pinpoints millennials—still ascending toward their peak spending power—as the leaders of this trend toward "experiences that are rooted in authenticity and nature." The kind of experiences that make for the perfect Instagram .

Art Markman, Ph.D., professor of psychology at the University of Texas and author of Brain Briefs: Answers to the Most (and Least) Pressing Questions About Your Mind , smells the whiff of First World problems. "You have to be pretty privileged already to have taken care of food, clothing, and shelter, so that now you’re just trying to play with motivation at the margins," he tells SELF. "You’ve dealt with all the stuff that would actively kill you today, so now you get to play this game of, how am I going to frame the rest of my life?"

The irony does not escape GWI's researchers. "While the global middle class continues to grow in numbers, rising income inequality is widening the gap between the ever-expanding wellness lifestyles of the affluent and the minimal wellness amenities/services currently accessible to lower-income people," the report warns.

Tuning Into the Mindfulness Market

Across the universe of healthy and healthy-adjacent trends, you're bound to find a mix of legitimate science, well-meaning practitioners peddling questionable advice , and more than your fair share of snake oil. Most of it probably won't hurt you, but you probably won't get a healthy return on your investment, either. Research finds that nearly a third of people stop using their fitness trackers —but if it first helped you identify bad habits and replace them with healthier ones, you could argue it was a couple hundred dollars well spent. It's harder to justify $8 on a cold-pressed beverage, considering that your liver doesn't need help "detoxing" your body —not with juices (antioxidant sugar water), or charcoal ( which can be dangerous ), or teas (luxury laxatives).

One of the latest trends to get the retail treatment is mindfulness, an ancient tradition turned healthy-living buzzword. Mindfulness, a practice of tuning your awareness to the present moment, comes from Buddhist and Hindu traditions, and the purported (but largely unproven) benefits of mindfulness meditation and therapies range from improving mood and aiding weight loss, to reducing the effects of aging and increasing IQ. Studies have revealed mixed results, but some promising research suggests that mindfulness practices have the power to measurably alter brain structure and may help decrease stress, anxiety, and symptoms of depression; mitigate the suffering of those with chronic pain and inflammatory bowel disease ; and increase well-being and quality of life.

Share via Pinterest Nick Dolding / Getty Images

Here on this site, we have written about how mindful eating can help you enjoy your food more (while eating less), and endorsed mindfulness walks as a way to control a racing mind . Articles on other sites herald the benefits of mindfulness in parenting , and in dentistry . The New York Times has a recurring column that describes how to be mindful while doing your taxes , gardening , and cleaning your bathroom . Well+Good suggests getting a mindful manicure .

“Mindfulness as a concept has been around for thousands of years, but it wasn’t until the 1970s, when scientists started discussing it in ways that were more appealing to a Western audience, that its benefits began to be recognized,” says David Cox, a physician and expert on mindfulness. “The mindfulness industry is now finding ways to be more relevant to a larger group of people, which is a great thing.”

The marketing is working. The meditation and mindfulness industry raked in an estimated $1.1 billion in the U.S. in 2016, according to market research firm IBISWorld. Cox formerly served as chief medical officer at Headspace, the world’s most downloaded meditation app, and one of 3,900 mindfulness and meditation apps currently available in the U.S. Apple app store. Last year these apps were downloaded nearly 14 million times, accounting for over $15 million in paid downloads and subscriptions, a 109 percent increase over 2015, reports mobile analytics firm Sensor Tower.

The monetization of mindfulness is mounting in brick and mortar, too. Meditation studios are becoming the new yoga studios on the East and West coasts, and cropping up everywhere from Idaho to Tennessee. It costs $18 to “book a cushion” for a 30-minute class at MNDFL, which bills itself as “New York City’s premier meditation studio” with three locations and counting. (An hour of private instruction will run you $160.) Investors are sinking millions into the burgeoning industry, with some, like Gary Vaynerchuk, CEO and partner of venture capital firm Vayner/RSE in New York, comparing its potential to that of SoulCycle.

Workplace wellness programs —which helped sow the seeds of the wellness revolution in their efforts to stem productivity losses caused by unwell workers—have jumped on the mindfulness bandwagon. (U.S. employers spend $14.4 billion annually on workplace wellness—more than any other country.) According to the 8th annual survey on corporate health and well-being from Fidelity Investments and the National Business Group on Health, released in April, 35 percent of 141 U.S. employers surveyed will have mindfulness classes or training in place this year—a 59 percent uptick over 2016—with another 26 percent considering it for the future.

The Search Inside Yourself Leadership Institute, which was founded at Google and launched as a separate nonprofit in 2012 (the name is a play on Google’s search business), conducts on-site wellness programs for businesses. Its client roster, which includes American Express, SAP, and Qualcomm, has grown from 48 to nearly 120 over the last two years, with multinational corporations clamoring to hold workshops such as “Self-Awareness: Develop a high-resolution awareness of your thoughts, emotions, and habits,” and “Journaling: self-reflection.”

Share via Pinterest Apple

Hawking Wellness One Week at a Time

Mindfulness and meditation are also shaping so-called "wellness tourism," one of the travel industry’s fastest-growing market segments. Global spending on travel with the active goal of “the pursuit, maintenance, or enhancement of one’s personal well-being” (as defined by GWI) reached $563.2 billion in 2015, up from $494.1 billion in 2013, a 14 percent gain—more than twice the rate of general tourism over the same period.

The smorgasbord of wellness-inspired escapes —the vast majority of which carry a hefty price tag—expands literally by the day. If $20 for an hour on a meditation cushion seems like a lot, consider luxury hotelier Belmond's Mindfulness River Cruises in Myanmar, where guests can choose a three-night (from $2,656/person) or seven-night (from $4,632/person) escape that offers Tibetan yoga and meditation sessions from morning to evening, healthy spa cuisine, and excursions to meditate in rural pagodas and under mango trees. Skiers staying at The Ritz-Carlton, Bachelor Gulch in Beaver Creek, Colorado, might opt for the “Mountain Mindfulness" ($429/night) or "Mountain Spa Morning" package ($600 for two), spending time off the slopes in a private wellness class, or a session at the spa’s oxygen bar (never mind that doctors have brushed off recreational oxygen's supposed therapeutic potential for 20 years). Hotels are also bringing experts in-house to cater to this emerging mindful mania: The uber-luxurious Corinthia Hotel London hosted a “neuroscientist in residence,” Tara Swart of MIT, for a yearlong study on stress, and offers Brain Power Packages, from $800 per night, that include meals from a special Brain Power Menu and a Mindful Massage with Yoga Nidra in the hotel’s dazzling four-floor ESPA spa.

Does it all sound a little over the top? Well, sure, but why not cater to wealthy guests who want to healthify their holidays by meditating in a pagoda and gorging on omega-3s in the lap of luxury? One might also ask: How do offerings like “forest bathing” (from the Japanese practice of shinrin-yoku , which loosely translates to “being in the forest”), which will run you $110 for two hours at The Grace Mayflower Inn & Spa in Washington, Connecticut, differ significantly from, say, taking a walk in the woods?

Perhaps the bigger question is whether wellness vacations—and the wellness movement in general—are tackling the concept the right way in the first place. Markman points to wellness tourism as a prime example of the industry’s championing of escape over experience—of fleeting fancy over lasting change.

“Wellness vacations are all about creating a lovely cocoon in which you can be stress- and disease-free for a week,” Markman says. “But when you look back on them, they’re not going to make you happy. You might be wistful that your boss wasn’t yelling and your kid wasn’t crying, but you weren’t doing anything.”

Share via Pinterest Don Riddle / Courtesy of Four Seasons

He argues that the path to wellness is much more about embracing enriching experiences than avoiding stressful ones. “We’ve created a world full of chronic stress, for which mindfulness can be very effective in providing pockets of relief,” he says. “But at the end of the day, when you ask people what they really want out of life, no one says, ‘I really want to be relieved.’ They say they want to be happy and fulfilled. And mindfulness isn’t going to do that for you.”

The key, says Markman, is to shift from the so-called “avoidance axis” to the “approach axis” by seeking out activities that stimulate and enrich: “If you look at all the research , experiences are what make you happy.”

Ultimately, it’s our ingrained compulsion to avoid negativity that fuels the wellness machine, he says. “Humans have a remarkable capacity to take almost any goal and…focus on avoidance. The wellness industry plays into that mind-set.”

Michelle Punj, director of operations at the California Health & Longevity Institute, housed on the grounds of the Four Seasons Hotel Westlake Village, says their offerings are designed to provide benefits long beyond checkout. “Our goal has always been to help our clients make a lifestyle change that is permanent and sustainable,” she tells SELF. The hotel, home to the largest Four Seasons spa in the world, pioneered healthy living before it was fashionable. An integral part of the hotel since it opened 10 years ago, CHLI counts three medical doctors, six registered dietitians, and two exercise physiologists among just its full-time staff. Psychologists do life coaching and relationship workshops.

With more clients expressing interest in wellness, the resort is expanding its offerings—including to local day-trippers who are not required to be hotel guests. Its Weight Loss Your Way four-week program, which the hotel launched last January, includes lunch and dinner six days a week, as well as healthy cooking classes, lifestyle workshops, and metabolism assessment for $1,800 (excluding a stay). Initially designed for the local market, the program was sold out in January and April and is drawing guests from as far away as Asia. Last year, the hotel launched Taste of Wellness, a one-day program that costs $299. “We want to showcase solutions that aren’t only available to wealthy people,” says Erin Bina, public relations manager at the property. Given the setting—an 11-acre resort on the outskirts of Malibu—such proclamations should probably be taken with a grain of Himalayan sea salt, but the demand is certainly there. Since its introduction, the program has grown twice as fast as any other offered by CHLI.

Health in the Penthouse

If merely sojourning in wellness isn't enough for you, welcome to the rarefied world of wellness real estate, the third-fastest growing wellness market, according to GWI's research. North America ranks number one in this market as well, accounting for $48 billion of the estimated $119 billion transacted worldwide in 2015 on properties with "a proactive wellness component." Homes built for healthy living are sprouting like organic dandelion greens in some of the country's toniest enclaves, with prices to match.

A select handful of the new Muse Residences in Miami Beach were designed by wellness (and self-promotion) guru Deepak Chopra, in partnership with real estate firm Property Markets Group, and high-flying design firm Delos, which counts Chopra and Leonardo DiCaprio among its board members. The luxury oceanfront residences aim to "restore" the natural elements of life that are ravaged by hectic urban life—air, water, light, and sound—to "awaken and support our own natural body rhythms." According to the website, Muse’s “advanced purification” systems meet “heightened, scientifically backed criteria for air and water quality, bringing in precisely what the body needs and filtering out the elements that harm it,” though it stops short of specifics, or of explaining how, say, its water purification system differs from others that are widely available. A 3,650-square-foot unit on the building’s west (street) side starts at $4.8 million, while an 8,165-square-foot corner penthouse unit overlooking the beach is listed at $18.5 million.

The wellness real estate boom is also spurring new guidelines like the international WELL building standard, the world’s first building standard focused on human health and wellness, which certifies buildings that adhere to over 100 measures (air, water, and light among them) and is currently being employed in 350 projects across 28 countries.

Last year, Tampa became the first city in the world to break ground on a WELL-certified district, a 50-acre development featuring greener construction, better air and water, and healthier options for food and fitness, all presented within the framework of a connected community with a simple goal: to improve the physical and emotional health of the people living there. High-profile backers include Jeff Vinik, the owner of the Tampa Bay Lightning professional hockey team (the development is anchored around its arena) in partnership with Bill Gates' investment firm.

Wellness pundits predict that healthy districts will draw not just prospective residents, but wellness tourists, too, whose vacation destinations will shift beyond spas and retreats to towns, regions, even countries where a pervasive sense of overall wellbeing will be the norm rather than the exception. Clean air, protected nature, and green markets galore are poised to become both the real estate amenities and tourist traps of the future.

Wiring the World to Be Well

Architect Joe Colistra has a radically different view of the potential of environments to foster wellness. His big idea: to improve the well-being of an entire populace through connected homes and urban planning.

The consumer market is already being flooded with personal tech for collecting (and obsessing over) metrics of health—activity trackers, lightbulbs meant to filter out melatonin-suppressing blue light at night, sleep-tracking beds (upon which you can test whether those bulbs are working), and iPhone-connected home air quality monitors, to name but a few. In Colistra's view of the future, you and your connected home might be just one node in a vast network of data points and algorithms tuned for optimizing your health and the health of your entire town.

In his work at the Center for Design Research at the University of Kansas, Colistra studies the potential impact that unlimited data in the so-called “smart cities” of tomorrow will have on population health, or the collective health of communities. Operating under the hypothesis that, by the year 2050, nearly 75 percent of the estimated 10 billion people then on the planet will be living in cities—some of which will be wired with gigabit networks running Internet service roughly 50 times faster than what most Americans have today—Colistra is exploring how sensors that monitor everything from vital signs to environmental conditions can be built into homes to help keep people healthier and inform public health strategies.

“There are probably 50 or 60 municipalities across the country looking to invest in gigabit networks for autonomous driving and faster streaming times, but the health and wellness implications of being able to push vast amounts of data is much more valuable,” he tells SELF. “It’s exciting new territory that’s not quite ready for prime time but is coming quickly.”

The list of possibilities is long and promising. Sleep sensors built into beds will take a ballistocardiagram of the heart to monitor sleep apnea and restlessness. Smart toilets will look for indications of dehydration . Advances in facial recognition software mean smart mirrors will be able to recognize new moles, facial drooping indicative of stroke , and plaque on your teeth. They could measure eye yellowing, an age-related degeneration that, by filtering out natural light, disrupts circadian rhythms, setting off a chain reaction of health decline. Pairing that data with customizable LED lighting, your master bedroom could reboot your circadian rhythms.

The predictive power of these emerging technologies could even prevent catastrophic health events before they happen. “Let’s say someone’s only had four hours of sleep a night over the last five nights, and he’s becoming dehydrated and is limping,” says Colistra. “You can overlay that data with environmental readings like high humidity and sub-freezing temperatures, which means there’s going to be ice on the sidewalk. Through predictive analytics, we can then say that in a city of 100,000 people, 10 percent have a chance of falling, of which a tiny fraction has a 95 percent chance. The ability to contact those 20 people or their families before they step outside illustrates the potential.”

Colistra's theories are predicated on innovations yet to come, but the effects could be life changing—even lifesaving. "It’s early days, but the technology is definitely there,” he says.

Share via Pinterest TWINSET

Wellness Is for Everyone. Sort of.

One of the overarching goals of Colistra’s work is to develop solutions that could be prefabricated, mass-produced, and made widely available. “It’s essential that these technologies be deployable at the scale of a city and across all income levels,” he says. “Population health cannot be effective if only applied to the wealthy.”

His point belies a fundamental problem with the wellness industry as a whole: It only works if you can afford it. And most can't. While many fitness enthusiasts are dropping $50 on a boutique workout and a stop at the juice bar, tens of millions of Americans are in constant threat of losing their health insurance . The commoditization of wellness begets a market in which the only ones buying already have their basic needs covered, and those most in need are priced out.

That's bad business. Not because it's unfair (which of course it is), but because limiting your consumer base limits your growth. Plus, it looks bad. The perception that Four Seasons' Bina acknowledges—that wellness remains, in very large part, the exclusive refuge of the rich—is a thorny optics issue that the industry is mobilizing to dispel, and a market hurdle it needs to overcome. "A wellness industry that’s become narrowly associated with wealthy elites must, and will, change" GWI's researchers note. "The future prospects of the wellness economy will be limited if it becomes a luxury segment that depends primarily on wealthy consumers."

The question becomes whether leaning further into exit-through-the-gift-shop meditations and luxe vacations will cause a trickle-down effect that rains healthy living on the masses—or widen the wellness divide even more.

There is some evidence that market forces can help drag the price of wellness services down from the stratosphere. Carl Daikeler, cofounder and CEO of Beachbody—perhaps best known for its P90X program, the cult workout of overachievers everywhere—has been riding the health and wellness wave for nearly two decades. The company reached $1 billion in sales in 2014. Two years ago, Daikeler launched Beachbody on Demand, making 7,000 hours of fitness programming available online for $99 per year—less than the cost of a month at most gyms. The service currently has 1 million subscribers, a number Daikeler wants to eventually grow to 50 million.

“We’re not doing this as charity, but because it’s a major opportunity,” he says. “Our goal is the network effect: The more people are doing it, the more people want to do it; the more people want to do it, the more people start doing it.”

Daikeler's success shows you can make a mint championing the democratization of wellness, and the concept is starting to spread across the industry. Massage, often thought of as a luxurious spa-day indulgence, can be useful not only for pain relief, but also for managing stress and improving sleep , and is increasingly being seen as a valuable piece of the self-care equation . This is thanks in part to lower-cost mass market businesses such as the Zeel app and spa chain Massage Envy, which, with nearly 1,200 locations in the U.S., offers basic massage treatments for as low as $50. Last year, Whole Foods—aka "Whole Paycheck"—launched a subsidiary chain of affordable healthy grocery stores; there are four West Coast locations of 365 by Whole Foods Market, with more to come this year. There is even a movement by the upper echelon wellness destinations to level the playing field. Pricey desert oasis Miraval, in Tucson, rewards deserving candidates who need wellness support but can’t afford it with free stays. (Consider that the exception to Daikeler's not-a-charity precept.)

At a time when populist backlashes are changing the course of history, industry insiders (and hopefuls) believe that a shift toward making wellness available to the public at large is both crucial and inevitable. This is the future of wellness, the optimists emphatically say. Let's all meditate on that.

Watch: I Have a Pre-Existing Condition