Easy Grilled Maple Dijon Salmon… with Bacon.

It’s disturbingly fitting that I should share a dinner recipe with you on this fine little Monday.

Because last night… I ate ice cream for dinner.

But it’s summer! So it’s okay.

And yes. I DID grill some salmon and covered it in bacon. How wrong is that? I mean, how right is that? Don’t fear, due to prior experience, I knew it would work.

MY OTHER RECIPES MY OTHER RECIPES





The thing is that I tend to go through salmon lulls. If you’re no stranger to this place on the web where I talk about food to my invisible internet friends, then you know that I have about a billion and one salmon recipes. Or you know, like twelve. Same thing. I say this every time. The point is that I’ve covered it in a dijon cream, broiled it with brown sugar and made a toasted sesame version and occasionally when I buy salmon? I have NO idea how to prepare it. Still. It’s like my brain is wiped clean and I’m starting from scratch. I find myself covering it in my favorite BBQ sauce and calling it a day.

Then there are other days when I can’t get my hands on a filet fast enough (like this one a few weeks ago? hello copper river salmon) because I’m dying to cover it in a mix of maple syrup and mustard and then top it with bacon. It just feels inappropriate. But it tastes so good.

Since we are all about grilling everything this summer, that salmon filet found itself directly on the grill just in time for dinner. I’ve also decided that grilling the fish is my perfect solution for when I buy salmon with the skin on. I’ve tried to cut it off myself and due to my horrifically embarrassing knife skills (or lack there of) I end up destroying the entire piece of fish. WAH. I often broil my salmon skin-side down, but this is even easier. Freaking.love.it. when my life is made easy and I get to eat the results.

I feel like there has been a severe shortage of bacon in my life lately and for no fault other than my own. Our fridge has been so jam-packed that I actually sort of… lost the bacon. And then I got too lazy to find it and the worst thing on Earth to me was digging through that fridge and then I ended up buying two extra pounds of bacon when I couldn’t find any and and and… ugh. Now I have a lot of bacon. This was pointed out to me last week my husband made me a BLT. Which, um, hi – is huge. He made me something that is not chicken or steak and did so all on his own. It was even his idea!

He’s learning.

Print Recipe Easy Grilled Maple Dijon Salmon with Bacon Ingredients: 1 1/2 pounds fresh salmon filet, skin-on (about 1-inch thick)

2 tablespoons olive oil

1/2 teaspoon salt

1/2 teaspoon pepper

3 tablespoons dijon mustard

1 1/2 tablespoons maple syrup

2 slices bacon, cooked and crumbled Directions: Preheat the grill to medium-high heat. Brush both sides of the fish with the olive oil. Whisk together the dijon and maple syrup. Sprinkle salt and pepper on the salmon, then spread the entire top with the dijon mixture. Place the salmon on the grill, skin-side down. Grill for 12 to 14 minutes, or until fish is flakey and opaque. Remove and crumble bacon on top. Slice salmon into pieces and it should easily come away from the skin. Serve immediately.

Be sure to follow howsweeteats on instagram and tag your recipes with #howsweeteats! You can also post a photo of your recipe to the howsweeteats facebook page. I appreciate you so much!

This is so right.