This gluten-free and paleo-friendly flatbread recipe calls for just three ingredients! I love using this paleo naan to scoop up curry. It’s also great as a tortilla, wrap, crepe, etc. It is so versatile!

**Update: If you like this recipe, you’ll want to check out my new eBook, South Asian Persuasion: 100+ Paleo Indian Recipes. In it, I have a COCONUT FLOUR NAAN recipe that is just as good as this one – and it’s nut-free. I also have other incredible Indian recipes like gulab jamun, vadas, jalebi, chicken korma, etc. Check it out!

Yes, you read that right. I think I have invented Paleo Naan and it only requires THREE ingredients. Truthfully, it was my mom who came up with this recipe but since I’m her kid, she has given me full permission to claim this genius recipe as my own. The beauty of this recipe is that you can make this into a savory tortilla type of bread OR you can use it to make a dessert crepe! The secret is in the amount of batter you use. It’s the most versatile batter EVER!

What is Naan?

For those of you who have never eaten naan – it’s an oven-baked flat bread that you find in Indian restaurants. It’s made from white flour and baked in a tandoor oven; it comes out fluffy and soft and incredible. This batter can help you achieve that – minus the gluten. Just pour the batter onto a greased or (eco-friendly) non-stick frying pan or this steel crepe pan (it’s the best!) and cook until the batter is nice and fluffy. If you want to make a dessert crepe, use less batter to make a thinner crepe (see directions below).

Oh, how I have missed using naan to scoop up my stew and Indian curry dishes. A lot of Indian people eat with their hands. The naan is almost like a spoon in a way – it scoops up the meat and veggies and sops up the savory sauce. I grew up eating Indian bread (roti, naan, stuffed paratha, puri, bhatura) and so being able to recreate this has been an important part of my paleo journey. I miss eating food that I grew up with – and now I can eat these dishes guilt-free – with a Paleo twist.

Now keep in mind this is a Paleo recipe. If you’re used to eating naan every day, you’re obviously going to notice a huge difference. Just remember that this naan is good for you. And, it’s delicious.

The three ingredients that make up this magical batter are: almond flour, tapioca flour and coconut milk (the kind that comes in a can and it must be full fat). If I’m making naan (or Pizza Crust or a tortilla), then I add a bit of salt. If I want this to be a dessert crepe, then I leave it as is. This batter is great because you can add whatever you want to it. Want some garlic naan? Add minced garlic. Want to throw some spices in the mix? Do it. Want to slather the naan with some incredible grass-fed ghee? Why wouldn’t you?!

In addition to making Paleo Naan, you can also make Paleo Crepes. Cook them on slightly lower heat and don’t use as much batter. Fill the crepe with something sweet (apple butter, lemon curd, chocolate chips) and take a bite of awesomeness.

Watch this video to see how I make Paleo Naan (and subscribe to my channel ):

Don’t forget to subscribe to my YouTube channel!

What else can I make with Paleo Naan?

Once you start making this paleo-friendly and gluten-free flatbread, you’ll find that you can use it for so many things! I use this flatbread to make all of these recipes:

Can’t eat nuts?

I’ve developed a nut-free recipe: Paleo Roti. I also have a recipe for Coconut Flour Naan in my eBook and I actually like it even more than this recipe!

What can I eat with Naan?

If you’re looking for some Indian curries, I have A LOT on my blog. Here are some of the most popular recipes:

If you love Indian food, check out my eBook: South Asian Persuasion: 100+ Paleo Indian Recipes.

Have more questions? I’ve put together a post on Commonly Asked Questions about Paleo Naan as well as my answers + tips.

This is a magical batter. I hope you love it as much as I do.

If you do love this recipe – follow me on Facebook – Instagram – & subscribe to my newsletter so that you don’t miss a new recipe!

