For example, for American men in the top 1 percent like our Mr. Moneybags, 87 really is a typical life span, according to research by the Stanford economist Raj Chetty and seven colleagues that was published in the Journal of the American Medical Association this month.

Alas, a gardener earning $30,000 a year is unlikely to live that long. Men in that income tier die, on average, at age 78. In this hypothetical case, that nine-year gap in expected life span radically shifts the relative financial return the two men would receive on their tax dollars.

If the gardener died at the age Mr. Chetty’s research suggests is typical for men at that income level, he would lose about $115,000 in benefits, compared with what he would receive if he lived as long as the wealthy man. And he would earn a 0.92 percent rate of return on his tax dollars — a bit lower than that earned by his much wealthier boss.

(The numbers on rate of return come from a model built by The New York Times that is based on the Social Security Administration’s work sheet to help people calculate benefits. The data is for people born in 1954 who began their peak earning years in 1980 and worked for 35 years at a constant inflation-adjusted income. At most levels, poorer people still experience higher returns than the wealthy even adjusting for life span, though that could change if the life span gap keeps widening.)

That result wasn’t obvious when Social Security benefits were designed. The benefits were intended to replace 90 percent of a person’s first dollar of earnings but only 15 percent of their earnings over $5,157 a month (and nothing above the income cutoff of $9,875 a month), giving less affluent people a theoretical advantage.

The Return on Social Security Taxes Paid … Inflation-adjusted internal rate of return % 3 2 1 0 5th ($7,000) 20th ($26,000) 60th ($77,000) 80th ($119,000) 100th ($2 million) … if everyone died at age 81 … based on the actual life expectancy of men Income percentile

(Approximate annual amount)

But Social Security has always been designed as a social insurance program, not as an investment fund. Essentially, the people who die unusually young subsidize those who live unusually long lives, so if you look at the program on narrow return-on-investment grounds, a person who lives to 110 is getting a far better deal than people who die a month after they first draw benefits.

And because different groups of people have different life expectancies, some groups receive more value from every dollar of payroll taxes they and their employers pay into the system. Over all, women live longer than men and African-Americans die younger than whites.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The idea that differing life spans between rich and poor would reduce the progressivity of Social Security isn’t new; the Brookings Institution economist Henry J. Aaron identified the problem in a 1977 paper. Research published in 2000 found that, with certain assumptions, the Social Security retirement system as a whole is regressive, or more favorable to the affluent than to the poor.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

What is new: It is becoming overwhelmingly evident that the life span gap between rich and poor is widening. A study published this year by Barry Bosworth, Gary Burtless and Kan Zhang found that life expectancy for the bottom 10 percent of male wage earners turning 66 this year has risen 0.7 of a year compared with what was expected for their low-income counterparts 30 years ago. For the top 10 percent of male wage earners, however, life span rose 8.1 years in the same period.

The research from Mr. Chetty and his colleagues indicates that the richest 1 percent of Americans gained three years of life expectancy from 2001 to 2014 alone, while the poorest had almost no gain (0.3 of a year).

For anyone who believes that it’s important for the Social Security program to remain progressive, the life-span shifts have big implications that are made more acute by the program’s financial problems.

Money coming into the system each year isn’t enough to pay benefits, and the Social Security Trust Fund is forecast to be depleted in 2034. That implies benefit cuts, tax increases or some combination or variation in the years ahead. As lawmakers consider Social Security’s future, the lessons from the latest research on inequality and life span are pressingly relevant.

A popular idea among many fiscal centrists and conservatives is to fix the finances of Social Security by increasing the full retirement age. (It is currently 66 and on track to rise to 67, though retirees can take a reduced level of benefits at age 62 and higher levels up to age 70.)

But the life span differential suggests that such a change would fall heavily on the backs of the poor. It’s true that on average Americans are living longer than they were in 1983, when the last major overhaul to the finances of the program was made.

“The way it’s usually put is: Has the health status of people near retirement age improved across the board?” said Mr. Burtless, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution. “But for many people it has not. People who have done backbreaking work or physically demanding work were no more fit in 1984 than in 1964.”

By contrast, he argued that raising the maximum annual income level on which Social Security taxes are paid, currently $118,500, would maintain long-term solvency while not putting more of a burden on the poor. That would effectively raise taxes for higher-income people. Another alternative might be to make the benefits structure more progressive, essentially reducing benefits for high-paid workers only.

That points to an important reality: The battles over Social Security aren’t confined to merely technocratic questions. They also concern core issues about government and social justice, and in formulating answers, the new body of research on income and life span really matters.