I think politicians could learn a lot from real people, regular people. You know, the sort that say what they mean and do what they say.

People who turn up when they say they will, do a hard day's work and try and do the odd kind thing because life is too short not to. Who might make the odd cock-up but manage to explain it away because they meant well.

Theresa May needs to take a lesson from the regular people of Great Britain. And start acting normal. Fast.

The Prime Minister reacts on a campaign stop near Doncaster today. Theresa, we need to talk

And if she can't be normal, if she is too institutionalised by years of working in the heart of darkness that is the political establishment, among snakes and thieves, she needs to surround herself with people who can show her how it's done.

Regular people who will explain to her that if she keeps ramming the words 'strong' and 'stable' down our throats like we are kids at a school for the learning disadvantaged, we will end up pelting her with our soggy sandwiches at break time when she starts acting about as stable as my nan. And she can't even do stairs.

Refusing to debate with five non-entities and Corbyn in front of a studio audience apparently plucked direct from Momentum head office was wise. I have had more useful conversations with Siri.

But Theresa, we do need to talk.

Us regular folk say we are going to do something and we do it. Usually because if we don't, there are consequences: we won't get paid, our kids won't get collected from school, someone we love will feel let down, we will lose out.

So don't say something and then U-turn on a sixpence when we shout at you.

Don't say there will be no snap election, and then call one when your advisers and the polls persuade you otherwise.

Don't tell our small businesses you are going to screw them over on National Insurance, and then back down two minutes later because you realise you just broke a different promise that you forgot about.

Mrs May (pictured meeting women and children during a visit to Kilham Hall community centre near Doncaster today) needs to take a lesson from the regular people of Great Britain

Don't embrace all of Labour's bad ideas in a manifesto more red than blue, then raid the hard-earned savings of loyal Conservatives to pay for those who have grown used to the idea that if they fail to take accountability for their lives, the government and the taxpayer will.

The dementia tax is a perfect example of this. I am sorry you were never able to have kids. Truly I am. But I did. We did.

What you have failed to understand is that this isn't our money you are going after. This is money we have earmarked for our kids.

If you dare to try and take what rightfully belongs to my children, then you bring the fight to your door. If you had employed one regular Brit in your team, instead of sycophants and strategists, they would have explained this to you.

I want to pay for my own care. But if you want me to spend my children's inheritance, then I need you to give me the right to die at a time of my choosing, too. When I succumb to dementia and don't know who I am or where I am, then truly, I have no desire to be there. The last thing I want is for my children's future income to fund my pitiful existence.

Here's another dose of regular-person reality for you, Theresa May. I have no wish to pay to feed other people's children or for their childcare, either.

Mrs May (pictured at Derby County Football Club while on the campaign trail yesterday) should not say something and then U-turn on a sixpence when we shout at her

Children are expensive. That's why we consider whether we can afford to have them before we decide to conceive another 50. I would have loved four. I have three.

I have no desire to buy breakfast for children other people decided to have.

Call me selfish? Fine. But I am not asking anyone to pay for two Weetabix for my child while I stand in the playground with a smartphone and a fag. I am cracking on, paying for my kids' schooling, still funding the state-school places for three others, and paying the top rate of tax. Go lecture one of the real tax-leeches on society. I hear Gary Lineker and Bob Geldof owe us a pretty penny on that front.

We may have loyalty to a party, but we vote for a person. Most of us don't necessarily look to our local MP for that face - I couldn't identify mine in a crowd. We look to the party leader.

Outside of the House of Commons, and some distance from the electoral Ebola that is Diane Abbott, Jeremy Corbyn does a much better job of looking like a regular guy. Someone who gets us, who talks to real people, who isn't that excited by nonsense or what he is supposed to say.

However, I am very clear. He cannot win, despite what laughable polls and curated leftie audiences on our state broadcaster may wish you to believe. This election needs some tension. And the media will fabricate it if they have to.

Mrs May (pictured during a visit to a manufacturing plant in Somerset on Wednesday) goes head-to-head with Jeremy Corbyn in a BBC Question Time election special tonight

Jeremy Corbyn's manifesto reads like it was written by Jesus. I may as well take everything I worked for and hand it to the idle arses down the road who have never worked a day in their life, are so fat they are classified disabled and get a free car, and are looking forward to free breakfast for their children - who seem to multiply like mould.

Which is all very well. But with regard to Luke 10: 25-37, the Good Samaritan would have been bugger-all use to the traveller set upon by thieves if he had been as poor as the rest of the population.

Under Corbyn, Brexit would be softer than Tim Farron's damp handshake, and another legion of barely literates would fester on university campuses, spending three years making themselves utterly unemployable via a dodgy 2:2 in David Beckham Studies or psychology.

But that's not to say Theresa would not be grievously wounded by a poor majority, both in her ability to control her own party through the tough and scary Brexit negotiations ahead with EU whose leaders would just love to be dealing with a humbled and humiliated British Prime Minister.

Tonight Theresa May goes head-to-head with Jeremy Corbyn in a BBC Question Time election special. The state broadcaster will be desperate to distance itself from the disastrous audience bias earlier in the week.

May has a fantastic opportunity to course-correct.

My advice to her?

Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn (who is pictured on a tour of laboratories at York's Innovation Centre today) has a manifesto which reads like it was written by Jesus

Ask the team that has advised you this far to stay away. They have been about as helpful as Ant and Dec's tax specialists and could end up costing you dear.

Stand outside and breathe the air. Ignore the noise generated by the rasping hyenas in the press and the panting fools who follow, slobbering for the entrails.

All of us are just regular people, with jobs, families, and homes we love. We want to be healthy and happy and feel safe in the country we call home.

Do you, but do you well. Say what you mean and mean what you say.

You have tried to do the odd kind thing, because life is too short not to. You've made the odd cock-up, but you meant well.

Explain that you are on the side of people working hard to pay for their families. That you respect the fact that many of us will sacrifice our spending today to save for our kids tomorrow; in death, more than ever, we want to help the kids we were lucky to have and able to afford.

Tell us the three things you are going to do to prove it: prioritise hard workers, deliver hard Brexit, and put a hard cap on the dementia tax.

Hard but fair.

You're welcome.