Podcasting is a great way to learn and be inspired. It's a new use of technology that hearkens back to the original social medium, storytelling.

If you have an interest in entrepreneurship, tech, leadership, business, creativity, or just learning and expanding your mind, here are 100 podcasts that can help you bring your best to all you do.

Pick out a few to start with, then get ready to listen and learn while you're in the car, on the treadmill, or during your morning commute.

1. Entrepreneur on Fire

Be inspired and learn from stories of entrepreneurship. Hosted by John Lee Dumas.

2. Office Hours

Business journalist and author Daniel Pink interviews business leaders and thinkers such as Biz Stone, Malcolm Gladwell, Tom Peters, and Harvey Mackay.

3. The Smart Business Revolution Podcast

Dedicated to entrepreneurs and business owners growing their business strategically and intelligently. Topics range from social-media tips to interviews with entrepreneurs. Hosted by John Corcoran.

4. StartUp Nation

Insights into entrepreneurship and small business. Hosted by Jeff and Rich Sloan

5. Solo Smarts

Kelly McCausey interviews "solopreneurs" and offers tips and updates related to running a solo business, with an emphasis on internet-based businesses.

6. Accelerate Your Business Growth

A variety of topics and guests from the business world. Hosted by Diane Helbig.

7. Stories From the Influencer Economy

Ryan Williams converses with people who have launched careers from content, social-media, and digital platforms.

8. How to Start a Startup

Lectures from Sam Altman/Y Combinator's Stanford University course, with Sam Altman, Dustin Moskovitz, Paul Graham, Adora Cheung, Peter Thiel, Alex Schultz, and more.

9. Defining Success

Zeb Welborn talks with successful people about what makes them successful and why some succeed when others fail.

10. The Growth Show

HubSpot CMO Mike Volpe interviews top executives on building and growing a business.

11. The Entrepreneurial Thought Leaders

A weekly seminar featuring an entrepreneur or leader. From the Stanford Technology Ventures Program.

12. Inc. Uncensored

A lively weekly podcast exploring startups, entrepreneurship, technology, and high-growth businesses. Hosted by Inc.'s editor, Jim Ledbetter.

13. TEDTalks Business

Stories and insights from innovators, entrepreneurs, and business researchers drawn from TED conferences, TEDx events, and partner events around the world.

14. HBR IdeaCast

Analysis and advice from the leading minds in management, including professors, scientists, authors, and other leaders across the business community, hosted by theHarvard Business Review.

15. Knowledge@Wharton

Articles and videos based on research, conferences, speakers, books, and interviews with faculty and other experts on global business topics.

16. The Economist Radio

Audio content from The Economist magazine.

17. Seth Godin's Startup School

Marketing and business thought leader Seth Godin guides entrepreneurs through building and running their dream business.

18. Entrepreneur's Journey

Yaro Starak addresses topics specific to online businesses and talks with successful entrepreneurs.

19. So Money, with Fanoosh Torabi

Interviews with top business minds and discussion of issues in finance, investing, and entrepreneurship.

20. The Entreleadership Podcast

Lessons from Dave Ramsey on business, team building, and leadership.

21. Leaders in the Trenches

Gene Hammett interviews a variety of entrepreneurs, authors, and speakers.

22. Manager Tools

Information about new tools and techniques to further your management and career objectives.

23. All in: Elevating Your Leadership Game

Interviews with leaders in business and global affairs to elevate your leadership. Hosted by Alicia Dunams.

24. The Introvert Entrepreneur

Beth Buelow interviews business owners for insights about overcoming challenges.

25. As Told by Nomads

Digital marketing specialist Tayo Rockson interviews leaders in business, culture, travel, and global affairs.

26. Six Pixels of Separation

Mirium president Mitch Joel discusses digital marketing, new media, and personal branding for online businesses.

27. This Is Your Life

Michael Hyatt's weekly discussion of intentional leadership.

28. Accidental Creative

Practical everyday practices to help keep you prolific, brilliant, and healthy in life and work.

29. One Simple Thing

Hosted by Dave Kirby. Focuses on small actions you can take today to improve your life, your business, and your world.

30. Grit

Formerly titled Quit, this call-in show, hosted by Dan Benjamin, focuses on helping people sort out problems, evaluate options, and make changes in their lives.

31. The Social Hour

Social web experts Sarah Lane and Amber MacArthur present social-media tools, news, and profiles.

32. Ambitious Entrepreneur

Host Annemarie Cross helps new entrepreneurs discover how to stand out from the pack.

33. Dose of Leadership

Interviews with relevant motivation and influence experts from a wide range of fields. Hosted by Richard Rierson.

34. Learning With Leslie

Leadership, marketing, and entrepreneurship, with Leslie Samuel.

35. Duct Tape Marketing

John Jantsch interviews influential marketing professionals on far-ranging business topics.

36. The Engaging Brand

In-depth interviews with recognized figures in social marketing, social business, and social leadership, hosted by Anna Farmery.

37. Social Triggers Insider

Derek Halpern gives straightforward, no-nonsense business and marketing advice.

38. The Entrepreneur Effect

Focuses on complex issues of marketing.

39. Negotiation Academy

A podcast course in nuts-and-bolts negotiation, offered by Columbia Business School and hosted by Slate.

40. Online Marketing Made Easy

Strategist Amy Porterfield provides advice on social media and online marketing applicable to entrepreneurs in any industry.

41. Inside PR

Roundtable discussion of social-media and PR topics. With Gini Dietrich, Joseph Thornley, and Martin Waxman.

42. Self Made Man

The pursuit of excellence in business, relationships, health, finance, and legacy.

43. Planet Money, by NPR

Stories from the rapidly changing global economy.

44. IDEO Futures

The intersection of design, business, and entrepreneurship.

45. Build Your Tribe

Interviews and practical strategies from top internet influencers.

46. Breaking Down Your Business

Brad Farris and Jill Salzman use a top-five format to address issues facing small-business owners.

47. The School of Greatness

Lewis Howes shares inspiring stories from business, sports, and other fields in an exploration of what makes great people great.

48. Starting From Nothing

Successful entrepreneurs tell how they built their businesses entirely from scratch. Each episode includes a custom action guide.

49. Startups for the Rest of Us

Mike Taber and Rob Walling share insights from their experience building companies independently without venture capital.

50. Smart Passive Income

Pat Flynn from the Smart Passive Income blog covers online business and blogging strategies, income sources, and marketing for online businesses.

51. Beyond the To-Do List

Covers various aspects of productivity and living a meaningful life. Erik Fisher talks with real people about personal and professional productivity.

52. Internet Business Mastery

Aimed at beginners in the business world, with most content relating to business startups.

53. eCommerce Fuel

Host Andrew Youderian, an experienced e-commerce entrepreneur, provides down-to-earth, actionable advice with a humorous spirit.

54. CEO Exchange

PBS-sponsored podcast of interviews with leading CEOs. Learn from the successful captains of industry!

55. Marketplace

Daily business and economics news updates; some episodes on specialized topics.

56. The James Altucher Show

Author James Altucher interviews well-known figures from business and tech on topics including entrepreneurship, investing, and health.

57. The Tim Ferriss Show

The author of The 4-Hour Workweek talks with world-class performers in a variety of fields.

58. Social Media Marketing

Social Media Examiner's Michael Stelzner navigates the social jungle with success stories and expert interviews from leading social-media marketing pros.

59. Youpreneur.FM

Author and speaker Chris Ducker discusses what it means to be a 21st century entrepreneur.

60. What Great Bosses Know

This podcast interviews managers and business leaders on practical skills they learned to become great bosses. Leadership lessons from the Poynter Institute.

61. The Chris LoCurto Show

Information to help you grow your leadership, your business, and your life.

62. Get-It-Done Guy's Quick and Dirty Tips to Work Less and Do More

Tips on productivity, time management, making technology work for you, and other practicalities to help you save time for more strategic pursuits.

63. Marketing Over Coffee

Business marketing information and tips on social media, new technology, and other marketing tools, as well as interviews with marketing experts.

64. The Great Work Podcast

Michael Bungay Stanier talks with thought leaders about finding and sustaining your life's work.

65. Foundation

Kevin Rose interviews tech entrepreneurs.

66. Eventual Millionaire

Business coach Jaime Tardy talks to millionaire entrepreneurs to learn their failures, advice, tips, and stories.

67. Killer Innovations Podcast

Hosted by Phil McKinney. As an executive at a leading high-tech company, Phil McKinney shares his experience, tools, tricks, and lessons learned about creativity and innovation.

68. The Bottom Line

Produced by BBC Radio 4 and hosted by Evan Davis. Wide-ranging panel discussion with business leaders.

69. Startup Grind

Interviews with successful entrepreneurs and thought leaders.

70. Smart People

Expert advice for all manner of personal and professional concerns.

71. The Solopreneur Hour

Hosted by Michael O'neal. The show is a "behind the scenes look" and deep dive conversation into what it takes to be a solopreneur.

72. Craftsman Founder

Discussions with authors and entrepreneurs provide a long view on startup strategy and writing books.

73. You Are Not So Smart

Explores issues of cognitive biases, heuristics, and logical fallacies through interviews with top scientists.

74. Freakonomics

Entertaining and wide-ranging stories about human behavior.

75. From Scratch

An NPR-produced podcast that explores the entrepreneurial life with leading pioneers from the business world, the social sector, and the arts.

76. Build and Launch

A weekly podcast focused on shipping small projects.

77. Daily Boost

Covers personal and professional topics including lifestyle design, balance, communication, career advancement, and success.

78. Mastermind Talks

For entrepreneurs who work on both their business and themselves.

79. Help My Business!

A nontraditional podcast that's been called "The Daily Show for entrepreneurs."

80. Bulletproof Radio

Information on technology for your mind, body, and life.

81. Crazy Is a Compliment

Linda Rottenberg shares smart lessons for cutting an entrepreneurial path in a turbulent world.

82. The Rise to the Top

David Garland helps "mediaprenuers" create and sell digital products and programs and how-to information online.

83. Get Busy Living

Benny Hsu discusses self-help, personal development, and better living.

84. 12 Business Ideas That Are Changing the World Podcast

Hosted by Allan Asher. What are the business ideas that are changing the world? Leading executives nominate the ideas and describe the challenges that are changing the way we do business today, and that will shape the business world of tomorrow.

85. Hack the Entrepreneur, with Jon Nastor

Discusses the fears, habits, and inner battles behind big-name entrepreneurs and those on the path to success.

86. 48 Days

Dan Miller, author of 48 Days to the Work You Love, discusses work, career, and business startup.

87. Women Who Startup

Celebrates, connects, and empowers women entrepreneurs.

88. Mixergy

A deep dig into the successes and failures of business founders and thought leaders.

89. The Full Ratchet

Nick Moran interviews venture and angel investing experts on successful investing in early-stage companies.

90. The 20-Minute VC

Includes topics related to venture capital, startup funding, and pitching to funders.

91. Free Thinking

A BBC Radio 3 stalwart featuring in-depth conversations with thinkers and cultural critics.

92. Marketing Smarts

Hosted by MarketingProfs, a leading marketing blog and education organization. Each episode tackles a specific issue.

93. Ask Gary Vee Show

Marketing, social media, and entrepreneurship advice.

94. On Being, with Krista Tippett

This NPR program podcast focuses on values, faith, and meaning in human connection and existence.

95. Stuff You Should Know

Conversational and entertaining, covering a little bit of everything.

96. TotalPicture Radio

Talent acquisition, HR tech, careers, leadership, and innovation tips.

97. PRI's The World

Global news and politics.

98. Sales Gravy: PowerPrinciples Podcast

Hosted by Jeb Blount. Sales professionals are the elite athletes of the business world. Like elite athletes, you must train to win.

99. Catalyst Podcast

Hosted by Ken Coleman. Practical leadership and cultural insights through in-depth interviews with renowned leaders, sought after speakers, and best-selling authors.

100. Conscious Business Podcast

Hosted by Theo Horesh. This show looks at the emerging world of conscious business and examines the strategies, leaders, cultural conditions, and new markets that are driving its evolution.

This post originally appeared on Lead From Within. Copyright 2014. Follow Lolly Daskal on Twitter.

Read the original article on Inc.. Copyright 2015. Follow Inc. on Twitter.