Flutter into fall. This Tuesday, September 5 electrifying Mars zooms into your garrulous third house until October 22, bringing out the social butterfly in you. Widen up the radius of your inner circle—at least a little—because kindred spirits are flocking into your orbit. Play entertainment director for the great people you already know. The culture vulture in you wants to feed, so line up the calendar with concerts, apple picking, photo hikes, and karaoke nights. The third house also rules partnerships, mostly those of the platonic variety. A creative collaboration could be sparked, or Mars may spur you to make a joint business venture official. A sibling, coworker, or even a neighbor might be your other half in this mission. With its reputation as the warrior planet, Mars CAN be an agitator. As easily as you'll snag a new soul friend, you might also lock horns with someone in your squad—your sister, cousin, or childhood BFF. Tension with someone living in your building or on your block (or even in adjacent cubicle) could also go from simmer to boil, as you suddenly cannot handle a certain noise you didn't even notice last week. Figuring out how to comfortably coexist might be your biggest challenge this season. Dreams of bi-city living on the horizon? By late October you could adopt the commuter lifestyle, shuttling back and forth between two locations. Keep that bag packed with your essential creature comforts—including your favorite scented votive and shawl—so you can take "home" with you on the road. For you, Cancer, familiarity breeds contentment.

Also on Tuesday, frenetic Mercury ends its exasperating three-week backspin which, since August 31, has been notched back into Leo and your money house. Your indulgent appetite was never meant to be tamed, Cancer, but you might want to draw the line at "Dionysian." Mercury's U-turn helps you get back onto a sensible (but sensual) budget for fall. Yes, you'll need to track your spending like a hawk—especially if you've got a big savings goal. Before you and your platinum card go rushing off to the mall or visiting your favorite online boutique, take inventory of your closets and drawers. With some practical (and discerning) magic, you may find you already have 80 percent of what you need. In fact, you might have MORE than you need, in which case, spin those threads into gold by selling them on eBay or hauling them to a chic consignment shop. With Mercury's pivot, your income forecast brightens, but don't sit around and wait for recruiters to email. Update your LinkedIn profile and resume. Gainfully and happily employed? What would it take to make you more satisfied? Train your eyes on the next rung of the ladder—and make a bolder move this week, since Mercury is only in Leo until this Sunday. Your initiative may line you up to snag a raise, bonus or fancy new title. The squeaking wheel gets the oil—and the gold.

Wednesday's happy hour special? Half-price rounds of truth serum! With the full moon in boundless Pisces hitting your candid ninth house it's going to be impossible to hold in your honest thoughts and feelings. For a sensitive Crab, it's important not to keep things inside, where they fester and grow. But when you're feeling slighted, you can also forget to be as compassionate to others as you'd like them to be in return. Retract the pincers and start out on the high road. Even if you're upset, you don't have to hurt people you love or burn a bridge you'd rather leave standing. Maybe your outpouring will be a gushy confessional of love. Under Pisces' romantic moonbeams, you'll curry Cupid's favor. Jonesing for a change of scenery? As this global full moon activates your wanderlust, you could be hopping a Boeing for work or flashing your passport to a customs officer as you capitalize on low season rentals in Santorini, Greece or the South of France. The ninth house rules publishing and entrepreneurship. Your desire to write a screenplay or launch a side business could also strike now. The two weeks after the full moon are perfect for getting those LLC dreams or chapter outlines in motion. Go!



SEE ANOTHER SIGN’S WEEKLY HOROSCOPE