Hill contends that faces betray our true emotions and can predict intentions, decisions and actions. He employs the psychologist Paul Ekman’s widely accepted FACS, or Facial Action Coding System, to decipher which of the 43 muscles in the face are working at any moment. Seven core emotions are identified: happiness, surprise, contempt, disgust, sadness, anger and fear.

Before the 2014 draft, Hill spent 10 hours with Milwaukee’s team psychologist, Ramel Smith, watching video of various college prospects and picking apart the psyches of potential picks. The Bucks had the No. 2 selection over all as well as three second-round picks, one of which they traded.

A vexing player at the top of the draft was Dante Exum, a point guard from Australia who was projected to be taken among the top four selections. Smith had done player personality analyses but wanted to validate them by having Hill present his player assessments first. The Bucks selected Jabari Parker with their top pick, and Exum fell to Utah at No. 5.

“Nothing against Exum, but emotional resiliency, stability and an immediate, assured presence were all key considerations in support of selecting Parker,” Hill said.

Until he sustained a severe knee injury on Dec. 15, Parker was among the leading candidates for Rookie of the Year honors, averaging 12.3 points and 5.5 rebounds. Exum is averaging 4.9 points and 2.0 assists coming off the bench for the Jazz.

Smith said he felt that if Hill’s facial-coding analysis could be so effective in such a short time, his skills would be even more useful when he was given more time to assess players and work with the organization. “I wanted him to be our secret weapon,” Smith said.

But is such facial analysis truly effective? Martha Farah, a cognitive neuroscientist and director of the Center for Neuroscience & Society at the University of Pennsylvania, said she was skeptical about its applications in sports.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“To me the big question is, how well does the method actually work?” she said in an email interview. “It’s not easy to get good evidence, because a player’s performance and teamwork are complex outcomes, and the teams are not run like clinical trials, with coaches and managers blind to the facial coding findings and so forth. So it’s hard to know whether this system works well, gives some marginal benefit or does nothing at all.”

Hill has done facial analysis for 16 years, mostly for companies developing advertising campaigns or new products. He said his analysis is especially useful with focus groups whose members are often unwilling to speak frankly or have trouble conveying their true opinions.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“I look for quick, micro-expressions and instances of the say/feel gap — said this, but felt that — to guard clients against what I call speed bumps: hidden objections that keep a person from buying, if not recognized and addressed,” Hill said.

Hill said he was inspired to take his work into sports after observing “profound sadness” in the face of Rafael Nadal soon before he lost the 2008 United States Open semifinal match to Andy Murray. The epiphany convinced Hill he could help teams find the “heart of a champion” by predicting and improving performance through facial coding.

Hill measures the players on the seven emotions and categorizes smiles, for example, four ways: true, robust, weak and micro. Consider Oklahoma City Thunder guard Russell Westbrook. According to Hill, Westbrook shows a high number of weak smiles or “satisfaction,” and enough “true” smiles, which equate to “joy” and contribute to what has been a highly effective season — averages of 28.6 points and 7.4 assists per game.

Photo

Football players are more difficult to assess because their expressions are obscured by a helmet’s face mask. Basketball is more suitable because players are exposed and there are fewer of them. Still, Jeff Foster, who runs the N.F.L.'s scouting combine, used Hill in 2011 to evaluate top prospects. He said Hill had a “master gift” for uncovering a football player’s emotional DNA.

Foster invited Hill to modify a set of questions posed to players. One of the queries Hill proposed was, “How would your mom describe you?” It is not the players’ verbal answer that matters, but rather their facial gestures when responding.

“Actions speak louder than words and are a more natural medium for players who excel in getting in the zone and acting intuitively with great speed and skill,” Hill said. “Verbal dexterity — including in the interview — is a nice-to-have, not a must-have. Besides, it might serve as camouflage.”

Foster said he believed that Hill’s services could be most useful for teams considering quarterbacks and safeties with high draft picks. Players at those positions require unusual leadership and cerebral traits that are notably hard to project.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Dan has created an interesting emotional profile model to correlate the emotions he observes to characteristics that are important to an individual’s success,” Foster said in an email. “I believe his insights could be valuable in helping teams understand an athlete’s emotional makeup and provide implications for how he may perform, both on and off the field.”

Mike Leach, Washington State’s football coach, had Hill evaluate his team before the 2012 season — his first there — in an effort to understand the kind of players he had inherited and what motivational tactics they might best respond to.

Leach lamented that coaches were overwhelmed with too much data that could lead to overthinking and indecision. But Hill’s facial coding, he said, could break through the noise. “Someday Dan will be able to get hard data linking the face to on-the-field performance, and I don’t want to miss that,” Leach said in a telephone interview.

Hill has worked with a few other teams, but the use of facial coding in sports is hardly widespread. Its acceptance may rest on the success of the Bucks.

If you want to be creative, Smith, the Bucks’ psychologist, said, “you have to be willing to be ridiculed.” “People laugh until they see results.”