The marriage will be the latest high-profile nuptials for Trump administration officials, and the Trump International Hotel in Washington has so far been the preferred space: Omarosa Manigault, a political aide in the White House and a Trump “Apprentice” alumna, married John Allen Newman, a pastor, there in April. Ms. Linton declined to share the names of guests but said that “many from administration” would be among about 300 guests expected to attend. One confirmed guest is the designer Ines Di Santo of Toronto, who flew to Washington in April to design a custom wedding gown. Veronica Di Santo-Abramowicz, Ms. Di Santo’s business partner and daughter, said in a phone interview that her mother had made a “very grand” dress for a “very feminine” bride.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Of the Moment The lifestyle newsletter from the Styles, Travel and Food sections, offering the latest trends to news you can use. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ms. Linton said she and Mr. Mnuchin, who live in a $12.6 million house in the city’s Massachusetts Avenue Heights neighborhood, have enjoyed the transition to Washington, where they have walked their dogs in Rock Creek Park and can ride their bicycles to Mount Vernon on the weekends.

“We enjoy the museums and architecture,” Ms. Linton wrote. “D.C. architecture reminds me of the architecture in Edinburgh where I was raised.”

But the Washington establishment has not exactly greeted the pair with open arms.

Mr. Mnuchin, 54, formerly of Goldman Sachs and a former Hollywood film financier, has been a frequent target of Democrats who tend to see him as a walking contradiction of Mr. Trump’s onetime campaign screeds against the global elite. Mr. Mnuchin has been scrutinized for failing to disclose the full scope of his financial assets. Ms. Linton has also found herself under the glare: In May, after Mr. Mnuchin named Ms. Linton the interim chief executive of Dune Entertainment, a financing company he helped found, she stepped down after Democrats raised ethical questions, CNN reported. Ms. Linton said the position was meant to be temporary.

As Treasury secretary, Mr. Mnuchin has become more prominent as financial battles linger for the Trump administration. He has said that his first priority is to get tax reform passed this year, and is playing a key role in urging Congress to raise the debt ceiling. Ms. Linton, whose affinity for an old-Hollywood aesthetic, including white-blond hair and the occasional bold red lips, cuts a distinct figure in Washington, seems similarly focused on her career as an actress. On Instagram, she often posts photos of red carpet appearances and photos from the set.

In one photo, Ms. Linton and Mr. Mnuchin posed together at the Governors Ball, held at the White House in February.

“Mr. Mnuchin you are the man!!!” one follower wrote.

“He sure is,” Ms. Linton responded.

It is Mr. Mnuchin’s third marriage, and Ms. Linton’s second.