Ever since our first visit a couple of years ago to Bluet Coquelicot, a Parisian flower shop where the customers are neighbors and as likely drop by for a glass of rosé as for a bouquet, we’ve been hoping for an invitation to tour the private courtyard garden of owner Tom de Fleurs (who lives just around the corner in the Canal St. Martin neighborhood).

This summer we got lucky when photographer Mimi Giboin just happened to be in town at just the right time to capture Tom’s tiny garden, looking its best. Here are 10 garden ideas to steal from a Parisian courtyard:

Photography by Mimi Giboin for Gardenista.

Create a Perimeter of Privacy

Above: A low brick wall and metal gate welcome visitors.

You don’t need a stockade fence to ensure seclusion in a courtyard. Tom uses a low brick wall as a ledge; on it sit planters and pots of greenery at eye level. To get the same look, create container gardens full of ferns and other lacy foliage that will create an airy green privacy screen.

Add Layers

Above: Vines and climbers get support both from trellis and from a second-floor metal balcony railing.

In a small courtyard garden where space is at a premium, Tom creates a tapestry of textures and allows plants to overlap and grow together. For a similar look, train vines and climbers to grow up a wall to create a backdrop layer of foliage.

Mix and Match

Above: Different shapes and sizes of planters create added interest.

In a small space, planters and pots don’t need to match. Individual containers will become a collection if you repeat a theme—group several terra cotta planters together, for instance—and then add variation with different sizes and shapes. See some of our favorites at 10 Easy Pieces: Terra Cotta Planters.

Embrace the Elements

Above: Metal shelving looks better as it ages and gains a rusty patina.

Unless you have winter storage space in a shed or garage, outdoor accessories such as shelves and planters will need to shelter in place. Make sure they can endure the seasonal vagaries of temperature changes as well as the elements (wind, rain, and snow) and choose materials (such as metal) that will look handsome with a layer of rust.

Pot Up a Woodland