Interior design can be a mystery to those who are not professionals. And of course, every designer has their own set of rules and ideas gleaned over decades of work. Now, a new book out next week offers a glimpse at that interior expertise, and in a unique format. Interior Design Master Class: 100 Lessons from America's Finest Designers on the Art of Decoration (Rizzoli) gathers essays—or lessons—from one hundred of the best American designers. Discussing topics within the realms of theory, structure, style, process, elements, and inspiration, this tome has the makings of a modern-day classic. Below, we’ve excerpted portions of five essays on the subjects of Perspective, Intuition, Sourcing, Exuberance, and Scale. Each individual’s musing is accompanied by an example of his or her work, to illuminate the tenet at hand. Happy decorating.

Perspective

Benjamin Noriega-Ortiz

In interior design, the happy marriage between architecture and decorating, the way you look at things makes a big difference between a pleasant solution and a transformative one. If we forget the labels and functions that we apply to rooms (and the furnishings that typically inhabit them), our interiors become more exciting and appropriate. All that’s required is a shift in perspective.

Color is another element that deserves a second look. When designing for kids or pets, I think white upholstery is best. That sounds counterintuitive, but if you think about it, white can be bleached and colors can’t; white tells you when it has to be cleaned. So why use fabrics that disguise dirt?

Intuition

Amanda Nisbet

Trusting your intuition can produce design magic. The great Paul Sills, who taught improvisation for the stage and was a founder of Chicago’s legendary Second City theater, put it perfectly: “There is no technique,” he said. “You just need a little respect for the invisible.”

Sourcing

Emily Summers

No matter the myriad of exciting ways to source innovative design, sophisticated interiors still need to be assembled quite carefully. That is why I always return to the ideals of 20th-century designer John Dickinson, who maintained that a room is finished when you can no longer take something away without it being missed.

Exuberance

Anthony Baratta

Color is, of course, the easiest way to make a bold statement. There are no bad colors, but it is a lot easier to create an exuberant interior with red than it is with beige. Love of strong color is a personality trait, and like an MGM musical, I choose to decorate in Technicolor. There are no rules when using color to foster exuberance, but I like using a classic combination like blue and white as a jumping-off point and then adding in the spice—such as orange.

Scale

Juan Montoya

Proportion is the relationship of parts to a whole—for example, the legs of a chair to its back. Scale is also the relationship of that chair to the room in which it sits. A designer should not be afraid to plant large pieces of furniture in a small room. Better to have one stunning piece by Jean-Michel Frank or a grand relic of the 19th century than countless small pieces without resonance or importance.

© Interior Design Master Class by Carl Dellatore, Rizzoli, 2016