My birthday in 2005. The following year I would decide to be an artist. In 2o06, shortly before my 18th birthday, I had a monumental week. With typical teenage audacity, I decided to figure out what I was going to do for the rest of my life. Within a week. I spent the week writing lists. Pros/cons. Writing about what I wanted in life. Sitting around thinking. Taking walks. And eventually came down to a few distinct choices. Programmer. I could make games for a living. I wasn’t a prodigy, but I was a fairly adept programmer for my age. Graphic designer. I took design classes at the community college as well and had picked it up extremely quickly. I had even freelanced a little. Carpenter. My dad builds houses for a living, and it was always an option (and, I suppose, sort of still is) for me to take over the company. Artist. Obviously we all know what I picked. The reason I decided to become an artist has nothing to do with what would make me the most money, or what I was “talented” at, or even what I necessarily always enjoyed the most. It was simply something that, in my gut, I just knew was the right choice. Without anything better to go on, that’s what I relied on. From this moment, the fear began. I have spent every day since, with some variance, utterly terrified of failing. Of not being good enough. Not making enough money to support myself. Being a horrible, embarrassing failure. And it was this fear that propelled me to improve. My first decision was where to go to art school. Incidentally, no one had told me not to go to art school at the time, so I started researching schools. I figured if I was going to do this, I wanted to do it right. So I looked up rankings and after tons and tons of research decided the Rhode Island School of Design was where I wanted to go.

Three of the drawings for my (first) RISD application. The plagiarism was strong with me.

I got in. Barely. I was wait-listed. But eventually got the call that I had gotten in. Unfortunately, it included no scholarships at all. The entirety of the approximate $35k tuition would rest on my shoulders (not to mention living expenses). This was a financially tough time for my family, so every dime would come entirely from loans. I wrestled with the choice as long as I possibly could. And decided not to go. I would, instead, reapply next year after working on my craft and improving my portfolio in hopes of receiving a scholarship. The first thing I did was sign up for a class at nearby University of Virginia to take figure drawing. I had never done any figure drawing beforehand and felt that lacking in my application.

Alongside this, I also began taking private lessons with a local portrait painter, Henry Wingate. He was trained classically and taught me many of these methods of slow observational drawing.

Some of the work done in Henry’s studio. These exercises did wonders for training my eye.

A year passed and it was time to reapply to RISD. I did a fresh set of their required drawings and sent in a portfolio of new work.

My second set of drawings for my RISD application. Slightly less plagiarism.

I still remember the day I got the letter from RISD. It was a big envelope. I had gotten in with a $20k yearly scholarship. The following months I would scramble to secure the student loans in order to pay the remainder of the costs. My parent’s financial situation, thanks to the housing crisis, was still bleak. So as much as they would have loved to have helped, it was on me (and the good people at JPMorgan Chase). My first dorm room at RISD I made it to RISD. And then I worked. I mean worked. To RISD’s credit, they are wonderous at making their students work hard. My classmates and I put in insane hours working on our craft. If it takes ten thousand hours, then I was getting there as quickly as I could.

As I was transferring with a fair bit of college credit, I had to attend a summer transfer course covering all of the fundamentals. This was some of the work done during that summer.

Work done during my first two semesters of basic illustration courses.

I used drawing class homework to do work that interested me. Which was, apparently, giant sad robots.

The year came to a close. I had made friends and did more art than I could possibly fit in this post. But the financial realities of staying for another two years were coming to the forefront. Tuition was rising and my scholarship was not. To stay would mean ending up with over $100k in debt. So I left. I transferred to the Virginia Commonwealth University. I had grown up in VA, so I was able to get in-state tuition. The school accepted me even before I applied. It didn’t have the prestige that RISD had, but I would be able to get a degree and continue my study of art. During this summer before I went to VCU, something extraordinary happened. You see, I had spent the entirety of my artistic career avoiding landscape art of any kind. I found it painfully boring. I would even go to a museum and walk straight past all of the Hudson River School painters. But this summer I actually walked outside with my paints. I did my first plein air work of my life. And I loved it. Every minute of it. The heat, the glare of light, the wind blowing around and bugs flying into my paint. Everything about it just felt… right. I had grown up in the woods of Virginia and it felt like a dream come true to get to create art and experience nature at the same time.

My first plein air work. Acrylics on paper.

So with this fresh outlook on what sort of art I thought I should make, I went to Richmond to attend VCU. I made a new group of friends. And we were all given the assignments of filling up sketchbooks. While I had always had sketchbooks and filled them up from time to time, VCU was obsessed with them. Our professors made sure we were constantly working in them, grading us largely based on the number of pages filled. Now I will take this opportunity to admit that I am not a very good draftsman. And despite filling a sketchbook or two mostly with line drawings, that didn’t improve all that much. So I started painting in them. I knew I could fill a page a lot faster with a brush than a pencil. Besides drawing my friends, sometimes family, and often strangers, I filled up my sketchbooks with studies of landscapes (from life, the masters, and photos). I knew if I wanted to make good landscapes, I’d need to study them a lot.

But still, as any good artist does, I continued to work on my figurative skills. But during this time I noticed an odd sort of trend. People tended to say much nicer things about my landscapes than my figures. Particularly odd considering less than a year prior I had been adamantly opposed to doing landscapes at all.

Assignments ranged, as they are, from the useful to the inane.

But this wasn’t enough. I knew that even though I was learning and improving, I needed to work on my own as well. I needed to pursue the things I eventually wanted to be paid to do. So in my evenings, after I was done with classes and homework — VCU, thankfully, had a considerably lighter homework load than RISD — I would do imaginative sketches of landscapes. Ranging from 30 minutes to 2 hours, you might have even called them “speed paintings” back in the day. But they were tools for me to learn how to develop an entire scene, color palette, and mood in a very short amount of time. This was one of the most important exercises I have ever done. This is where I took the years of study and began really applying them.

People responded to them. A lot. But still, I knew that I had to do more if I was going to get paid to do this. Everything I did was unfinished. I am an obnoxiously impatient person and I had a hard time working on a piece to completion. I would get sick of something and just want to move on to the next piece. Which is often what I did. So I was sitting on a pile of unfinished work and my junior year was coming to a close. I buckled down and forced myself to finish just one piece.

“The Journey Ahead”, my first finished landscape painting.

I had done it. And I was proud. I had produced a piece that, despite all of the flaws I now see in it, is at a fairly professional level. The lighting is good, the composition is solid, the space and atmosphere is believable, and I had forced myself to take enough time that most things are decently rendered. So during the remainder of my semester and into the summer, I worked on finishing my first portfolio of work.

My first portfolio. The last piece was, interestingly enough, the first piece to be published in Spectrum.