If you read design and lifestyle magazines and blogs, you know that ceramics are having a major renaissance right now. Everywhere I look, there’s a new article on the next wave of ceramicists, and it seems like (thanks to pottery classes everywhere) we’re all learning how to make our own dinner plates. I think any resurgence of handmade goods is fantastic. And man, do I love anyone who knows how to make something beautiful on a potter’s wheel. But lately, I’ve been feeling a new wave of artists and makers start to swell — and their focus is on embroidery.

All over the Internet (on social media and in shops and online boutiques), embroidery seems to be having a huge comeback. Most design trends are cyclical, so I’m sure we’ll see embroidery come back over and over, but right now my Instagram feed is flooded with amazing people making magic in embroidery hoops. But instead of traditional designs, these artists are embroidering more aggressive sayings and mantras, embracing the darker side of stitching; and tapping into the type of delicate imagery we’re seeing in the poke-and-stick-tattoo scene that’s happening right now, too.

From flowers and foxes to names and complete landscapes, these embroidered designs feel perfect for the season. While I’m in no way an expert crafter, I’m excited to swap out some of my normal “while-I-watch-movies” routines for crafting some custom embroidered pieces on hoops this winter. It’s the perfect way to learn something new and pass the time inside while the temperatures drop below zero outdoors. Read on to discover 18 of my favorite embroiderers to follow on Instagram and, as always, please feel free to suggest your favorites in the comment section below. I’m excited to discover some talented new artists. xo, grace

*Stay tuned for another roundup next week of some skilled embroidered-patch makers, curated by artist and designer, Tuesday Bassen!

1/18 Sarah K Benning : Sarah's amazing embroidered images of interiors are at the tippity top of my "must-follow" list. She has incorporated some of our design community's most beloved trends (antique rugs, succulents and vintage furniture) into beautiful hoop designs.

2/18 Moonrisewhims : I love all of the plants and greenery that Renee of Moonrisewhims uses in her work. These botanical-meets-geometric designs are my favorite.

3/18 Happy Cactus Designs : I love, love, love Brannon's embroidery work. Her hoops are filled with fields of tiny flowers and each one makes me want to clear off a wall to fill it with Brannon's work. If you love color and texture, this is a must-follow feed.

4/18 Carrie Violet : Carrie is the artist behind the Memorial Stitches feed and I am completely and totally in love with all of her work. It feels like Edward Gorey's granddaughter grew up and turned all of his slightly ghostly work into beautiful, embroidered designs. I can't get enough.

5/18 Emillie Ferris : Emillie is based in the UK, where she creates wonderfully lifelike embroideries, focusing on my favorite: pets! I'm hoping to have one of these made for each of our pets.

6/18 Cinder and Honey : This Vancouver-based feed is full of gorgeous florals - one of my favorite motifs in embroidery.

7/18 Stephanie Lapre : Stephanie's embroidery work more often than not revolves around mountainous geometric shapes. I love her graphic, simplified take on such a classic landscape scene.

8/18 Sew and Saunders : Jo Fagents lives and works in the UK where she produces lovely, botanical-inspired embroidery.

9/18 Coral & Tusk : A Brooklyn favorite, Coral & Tusk has been doing modern embroidery for years now, and their team produces a wide range of designs - from small ornaments to embroidered pillows and hangings.

10/18 KimArtDesigns : Kim has such a nice way with bright, colorful florals. These feel like a wonderfully modern version of a classic style.

11/18 Adipocere : Josh's work leans toward the macabre (which I love) and his detailed line work is something he carries over to the tattoo parlor, where he creates artwork as well.

12/18 Stitchyouup : Yasemin's feed is full of fun embroidery that echoes that crossover between the worlds of embroidery and tattoo. I really like her hoop art - a gallery wall of these would look amazing.

13/18 İrem Yazıcı: İrem's @ baobaphandmade feed was made for anyone who loves a miniature. All of these teeny tiny embroidered hoops are like miniature works of art. I especially love the mini vegetable designs.

14/18 Cut_And_Rum : Alice is another talented embroiderer who knows her way around a mini design. From tiny detailed cat portraits to mini plates of spaghetti, she can turn just about anything into a beautiful embroidered picture.

15/18 Eradura : Erika's feed makes me wish I still had my high school jean jacket so I could smother it in her incredible hand-embroidered patches. The moths on her feed right now are my absolute favorite. I need to find an excuse to work them into my wardrobe.

16/18 llllllllillllllll : This North Carolina designer's feed name may be hard to remember offhand (I find it easier to cut and paste into my browser), but it is full of gorgeous embroidered line work depicting everything from delicate forest ferns to classic nudes.

17/18 Threadhoney : This feed, run by artist Jennifer Cardenas Riggs, is equal parts comedy and embroidery. Her designs keep me cracking up and coming back for more.