According to Ayurveda, your daily routine helps build up resistance to or facilitate specific diseases. Drinking fresh pineapple water before your breakfast is one those healthy morning rituals that may improve your health.

Pineapple contains a many lesser known micronutrients. It is packed with bromelain and vitamin C, and these both aid in every healing many processes in the body.

10 reasons to add pineapple to your water

1. Fights Inflammation

Bromelain has strong anti-inflammatory properties. It helps the body eliminate toxins by fighting off inflammation that affect tissues and organs. Regular consumption of pineapple aids in the treatment of arthritis and sports injuries by reducing inflammation and relieving pain.

2. Healthy Weight Loss

Thanks to its high fiber content, pineapples take more time to digest, and thus makes you feel full for longer. Pineapple water prevents sugar and fat cravings. Thiamine converts carbohydrates into energy and boosts metabolism.

3. Flushes Parasites From Liver and Intestines

Bromelain has anti-parasitic properties. Some studies have shown that a three-day pineapple fast kills off tape worms.

4. Proper Thyroid Function

Pineapples are rich in iodine and bromelain. These help in the treatment of many autoimmune disorders, and relieve thyroiditis-associated symptoms.

5. Balanced Electrolytes

Potassium found in pineapples make your body stronger and maintain proper electrolyte balance, thus preventing cramps or injuries.

6. Flushes Out Heavy Metals and Toxins

Pineapple is packed with fiber, enzymes and antioxidants that clean the body from heavy metals and toxins.

7. Digestive Aid

Bromelain stimulates the body to digest proteins more efficiently.

8. Strengthens Gums, Whitens and Preserves Teeth

According to Dr Frawley, bromelain is a natural stain remover. It breaks up plaque efficiently.

9. Improves Vision

Beta-carotene and vitamin A are essential for eyesight. A study published in the Archives of Ophtalmology has shown that 3 or more servings of pineapple a day reduce the risk of age-related macular degeneration (ARMD), which is cause number one of vision loss in elderly.

10. Anticancer Protection

The journal Planta Medica published a research according to which bromelain is superior to chemo drug 5-fluorauracil in the treatment of cancer. Researchers explained:

“This antitumoral effect [of bromelain] was superior to that of 5-FU [5-fluorouracil], whose survival index was approximately 263 %, relative to the untreated control.”

Sources:

organichealth.co

livingtraditionally.com