“We kept thinking we’d find a success story, a place where seafood wouldn’t be mislabeled,” Ms. Lowell said. “Every single study that we reviewed except for one found seafood fraud.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even that case had a caveat Ms. Lowell said, because it took place in Tasmania where some mislabeling, like calling hake “smoked cod,” is allowed under Australian regulation.

About 80 percent of the studies were conducted at grocery stores and restaurants. Because these locations are at the end of the supply chain, retailers tend to have higher instances of mislabeling. The report doesn’t name names. Ms. Lowell said the researchers were not sure whether the restaurants and food stores knowingly deceived their customers, or if they themselves were victims of a bait and switch when they purchased the fish.

They found that 58 percent of the mislabeled samples were substituted for fish that could potentially pose health risks to certain consumers, especially pregnant women and children. In a New York grocery store they found blueline tilefish, which is on the Food and Drug Administration’s “Do Not Eat” list because of its high mercury, sold as “Alaskan halibut” and “red snapper.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Science Times Newsletter Every week, we’ll bring you stories that capture the wonders of the human body, nature and the cosmos. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In some cases the substituted fish turned out to be an endangered species, such as in Brazil where “sharks” were actually meat from the largetooth sawfish, which is critically endangered according to the International Union for Conservation of Nature.

Ms. Lowell said that one way to combat seafood fraud in the United States is by implementing stricter regulations for fish-tracking that extend throughout the supply chain.

Gavin Gibbons, the spokesman for the National Fisheries Institute, a trade group that represents the seafood industry, criticized the report and stressed that its findings reflected only what the selected studies found and were not representative of all seafood sold globally. He added that the best fix for seafood fraud is more enforcement of the law rather than more bureaucratic regulations.

“Oceana’s focus on the most often mislabeled species distorts their findings by design,” he said in an email.

Ms. Lowell disagreed. With more than 25,000 samples tested from around the world, she said it is the most comprehensive review of seafood fraud to date.

“This report reveals that it’s a global problem,” she said, “and it’s not going to go away on its own.”