Me, I’m going to get a re-up on miso paste, gochujang and rice vinegar, in keeping with rules that the chef Dale Talde taught me a few years ago, and that I shared in an article about building a pantry for flavorful midweek cooking. I’ll reward myself this evening with a big dinner of orange beef, white rice and steamed greens dotted with oyster sauce.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Cooking Newsletter Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Monday’s for hot dogs and brats, tomatoes and ice cream, whatever helps you honor the American labor movement and the contributions its workers have made to the strength and culture of the United States. (Here’s Paul Robeson, singing “Joe Hill.”)

Then on Tuesday: Cook Nigella Lawson’s recipe for fish with toasted almonds, which I think would be nice with Mark Bittman’s recipe for a green rice pilaf.

For Wednesday night, how about making Florence Fabricant’s recipe for chicken paillards with corn salad? Pair with a dry German Riesling, if you want to please her, and you do.

Thursday dinner, this week, I think could be Melissa’s recipe for coconut red curry with tofu, which is ridiculously good and might possibly be a game-changer for you, particularly if tofu is not (yet!) part of your cooking repertoire.

And on Friday? Get autumnal already: Make Samin Nosrat’s recipe for a buttermilk-marinated roast chicken and serve it with a platter of roasted vegetables. Take a walk after dinner and think about what it’d be like to have known Anne Sexton, hung out with her in a college rathskeller, read this poem there, smoked a few cigarettes with her, while talking about the work. Imagination nation!

Many thousands and thousands of recipes to cook right now and this coming week are available on Cooking. Please sign up for a subscription today so you can get to all of them. You can save and organize them, send them to family and friends, cook them, make notes on them, and post about them on social media, if that’s your cup of tea. And, as always, you can reach out for help, if you run into problems with the site, apps or paperwork, or the recipes themselves. We’re at cookingcare@nytimes.com.

Now, finally, you have to read Jazmine Hughes on Elaine Welteroth, the editor of Teen Vogue, here in The Times. You have to do that right now. It will be on the final exam, and you will get an A.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Follow NYT Food on Facebook, Instagram, Twitter and Pinterest. Get regular updates from NYT Cooking, with recipe suggestions, cooking tips and shopping advice.