A healthy and balanced diet is the best way to deliver vitamins and minerals to your body. However, even if you eat well, there's a good chance you’re lacking important nutrients due to your age and susceptibility to health problems. A blood test will often detect vitamin deficiencies, but sometimes there are common deficiencies that can be spotted on your skin, hair, or nails.

In the video, "5 Vitamin Deficiencies That Show Up In Your Face," Natural Cures explains you can assess the nutrients you lack by looking in the mirror. A simple way to discover certain ailments is by looking at your face. There are five signs of nutrient deficiencies that can easily be spotted by and treated with healing foods.

Puffy Eyes

You probably will notice your eyes are puffy after waking up. However, excessive puffiness may indicate a low supply of iodine in the body. A 2006 study discovered a connection between iodine intake and thyroid disease — a condition that can lead to fatigue , exhaustion, and puffy eyes, among many others. Other signs of an iodine deficiency include dry skin, weight gain, and brittle nails.

Healing Foods: Cranberries, yogurt, kelp, potatoes, strawberries, and navy beans.

Pale Skin

A pale complexion can be a sign you need to increase your vitamin B12 intake, according to Medline Plus. A lack of this vitamin can lead the skin to suffer, and promote feelings of fatigue. Another symptom of a deficiency in this vitamin is a completely smooth tongue.

Dry Hair

Bad hair days are common, but if yours is due to dryness, this could be an indicator you lack biotin or vitamin B7. Low levels of biotin can lead to brittle nails and thinning hair. High doses of biotin via vitamin supplements can be helpful for improving hair quality and even the treatment of diabetes.

Healing Foods: Eggs, almonds, nuts, legumes, and whole grains.

Pale Lips

If your lips are pale, this could mean you're anemic, and need more iron in your diet. Catching more colds can be blamed on low iron levels; plus an iron deficiency can weaken your immune system. In addition, the combination of pale skin and pale lips are tell-tale signs that you're anemic.

Healing Foods: Red meat, seafood, beans, dark green leafy vegetables, iron-fortified cereals, and peas.

Bleeding Gums

It's normal to see a little blood after flossing, but if you notice your gums are sensitive, and bleed frequently, this could be a sign of low vitamin C. A persistent lack of vitamin C in your diet can lead to a condition called scurvy. Symptoms of scurvy include easy bruising, easy bleeding and joint and muscle pains.

Healing Foods: Oranges, red peppers, kale, brussels sprouts, broccoli, strawberries, and grapefruit.

It's best to consult your doctor if you feel you have any of the vitamin deficiencies listed above.