I have a dear friend who's recently purchased and moved into a new home that while charming, is much smaller than her last house. And while there are still some boxes that need unpacking and plenty of DIY projects already on her list to complete, she recently tackled a simple task that made her breathe much easier and feel a little more settled in and organized: She tackled the wire management!

If you're looking for a quick way to improve the look of your home almost instantaneously (though those with particularly messy cord areas might see less of an "instant" improvement), wire management can make a big impact. It's not as bold as painting a wall a bright color, but hiding your wires (so that they still function and are accessible) so that they don't stick out like a sore thumb does have a strong influence on the look of a space.

1. First, look at your rooms with fresh eyes to identify the wire problem areas

When you live in your home every day, it gets harder to spot when wires go haywire behind an entertainment center or desk.

2. Next see if there's anything you can eliminate

I can't tell you how many times I've found things I'm not even using anymore. Really streamline your plugged-in items and see if there's anything you can cut back on.

3. Decide what sort of organizational tools would best help you

It could be as simple as some zip ties to tie wires together, or you might need some other more advanced organizational tool. The point is to really look at what you might need to help you — especially if you've just sort of done a half-way job in the past — and really invest a little time or money into doing it right this weekend. Here are some tools to consider:

4. Don't just look at the common areas

Don't forget about lamp cords, hanging light cords or perhaps areas like in your kitchen. Also think about the wires in your house that are always changing, like plugging in your laptop or cell phone. Here are some ideas for creating a charging station:

How have you tackled wire management in your home? Give us your best secrets below in the comments!