␡ Cooking is more fun with friends. Find your friends who are already on Food52, and invite others who aren't to join. Let's Go

Learn more

␡ Join Our Community Follow amazing home cooks. Collect recipes and articles. Get inspired. Sign Up

Fast Vanilla Oatmeal Biscuits with Strawberries and Brown Sugar Sour Cream

Author Notes: Every component of this dessert -- or breakfast? It does have fruit and oatmeal... -- is wickedly addictive on its own. Put it all together and you've got an epic summer dessert that's fast and transportable. —Modern Family Cooking - Nicole

Food52 Review: WHO: Modern Family Cooking - Nicole is a former private chef and caterer whose most loyal customers are her children.

WHAT: A dessert for when you forget to make dessert, or a breakfast for when you’ve got 30 minutes to spare.

HOW: While your whole-wheat biscuits bake, mix together a tangy-sweet sour cream topping and slice fresh strawberries. We don’t even have to tell you what to do when the warm biscuits come out of the oven.

WHY WE LOVE IT: There are some times of the year when we can’t get enough sugar, but during the summer, we crave not-too-sweet desserts that rely on the flavors of fresh fruit. These biscuits have just the right balance of tang and sugar -- and of crunch and cream -- and we already have all of the ingredients in our pantry. — The Editors

Advertisement

Makes 6 to 8 biscuits

2 cups whole-wheat pastry flour

2 teaspoons baking powder

1/2 cup old-fashioned oatmeal

1/2 teaspoon plus 1 pinch Maldon or kosher salt, divided

1 tablespoon plus 1/2 cup light brown sugar, divided

1 1/2 cups heavy cream

1 teaspoon plus 1 dash vanilla extract, divided

1 cup sour cream

1/2 lemon, juiced

Sliced strawberries Preheat the oven to 450° F. Whisk together flour, baking powder, oatmeal, 1/2 teaspoon salt, and 1 tablespoon brown sugar. Add heavy cream and 1 teaspoon vanilla and mix together. Flour your counter and dump the dough onto it. Knead just until the dough comes together and absorbs some of the flour from the counter so that it is no longer as wet and sticky. Pat the dough to 1/2-inch thickness, then cut into pieces with a knife or biscuit cutter. Place the biscuits on a parchment-lined baking sheet. (If you don't have parchment, just spray the bottom of the pan with cooking spray or smear it with butter.) Bake for 15 minutes. While the biscuits are baking, slice the strawberries and set them aside. Mix together the sour cream, 1/2 cup brown sugar, lemon juice, a dash of vanilla, and a pinch of salt in a bowl. Stir until combined. You don't even have to cut the biscuits in half -- simply top them with strawberries and the brown sugar sour cream topping.

This recipe is a Wildcard Contest Winner!

This recipe is a Community Pick!

This recipe was entered in the contest for Your Best Picnic Recipe

More Great Recipes:

Fruit|Desserts