Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton clashed over Mr. Trump’s favorable view of President Vladimir Putin of Russia. She pointed out that Russian hackers have been traced by numerous government intelligence agencies as the source of leaks undermining the Democratic Party and the American election. Mr. Trump defended the Russian leader, insisting he had no close relationship with him, but that Mr. Putin had “outsmarted” Mrs. Clinton “every step of the way.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

They clashed as well on the issue of abortion, with Mrs. Clinton noting Mr. Trump had previously said abortion should be illegal and women who have them should be punished and that he also wants to defund Planned Parenthood. Mr. Trump said he would appoint anti-abortion justices to the Supreme Court.

And he stood by his insistence that he would build a massive wall across the Mexican border. “We have some bad hombres here,” he said, maintaining his insulting allegations that Mexican immigrants are criminals. Mrs. Clinton, clearly trying to needle her thin-skinned opponent, said he ducked the issue in his visit to the Mexican president: “He choked.”

The debate was tightly directed by the moderator, Chris Wallace, but Mr. Trump showed no inclination to back off his bullying and cunning in keeping the focus on himself rather than on the problems of the nation.

Mr. Trump again faced the issue that sent his reputation into a tailspin in recent opinion polls — his hot-microphone bragging in 2005 that he sexually assaulted women. Women have come forward to offer evidence of instances of abuse, and Mr. Trump insisted, falsely, that the accusations have been debunked. “They want either fame, or her campaign did it,” he said. “She got these people to step forward,” he said of Mrs. Clinton, as usual offering no evidence for his claims.

“Nobody has more respect for women than I do,” Mr. Trump declared, in one of his more transparent lies of the night.

Mr. Trump’s meltdown in the closing weeks could be dismissed as a sore loser’s bizarre attempt at rationalizing his likely defeat. But his trashing of the democratic process, in service of his own ego, risks lasting damage to the country, and politicians of both parties should recoil from him and his cynical example.