In a world ruled by social media, online image is the key to success, and now a host of services are springing up to optimise your personal brand – by supplying fake followers, monetising your pets or revealing how to write an Amazon bestseller overnight

So you want to write a bestselling book? Of course you do. Literally everyone and their dog thinks they have a book in them. And while not everyone may be able to write, with enough guile behind you pretty much anybody can make it to the top of a bestseller list.

Take Lani Sarem, for example. For a few hours in August, the novice author’s debut novel, Handbook for Mortals, was No 1 on the New York Times bestseller list for young adult literature. Soon after Sarem’s fantasy novel reached the top spot, however, there was a plot-twist. People on social media began questioning exactly how a book nobody had ever heard of, by an unknown author, put out by an unfamiliar publisher, had suddenly magicked its way on to a prestigious literary list. The answer was somewhat prosaic: bulk-buying copies of the book from bookshops that report their sales to the New York Times.

Bulk-buying is a tried and tested way of getting on the bestseller list and there are even specialist consultancies that will help you do it. However, the practice presents two problems: you actually have to write a book and you have to spend a fair amount of money buying it up. Thanks to the wonders of the modern internet, however, there are less arduous and expensive ways to get bestseller status.

The fastest, cheapest way is probably via Amazon. Last year a guy called Brent Underwood wrote a bestselling book called Putting My Foot Down: A Book Featuring My Foot, which consists solely of a picture of his foot. There are no words. There’s no story. It’s just a picture of a man’s left foot. You see, last year Underwood, a partner in a US marketing company, decided he wanted to tell the world about the “biggest lie in publishing … the word ‘bestseller’.” So he took a photo of his foot and self-published it on Amazon.

Here’s the thing about Amazon: it has hundreds of uber-niche categories you can choose to self-publish in and tracks the highest seller in each of these categories. Hit that spot for a mere hour and you get a shiny “#1 Best Seller” banner for life. So Underwood put his book in the Freemasonry category and set the price (another thing Amazon allows you to do) at $0.99. He bought a copy of the book and got a couple of friends to do so. All-in-all it took three sales, a princely investment of $2.97, to make his masterpiece the biggest seller in the Freemasonry category and get an orange bestseller banner next to his name. (Amazon removed the book when he published an account of what he had done.)

Underwood isn’t the first person to discover you can game Amazon’s algorithms. As he points out, there’s a whole cottage industry around it: myriad online courses, webinars and consultants promising to get you to bestseller status for just a few thousand dollars. While the accolade may be hollow, it’s far from meaningless; as Underwood notes, being an Amazon bestselling author “dramatically increases your credibility and ‘personal brand’.” If you are a businessperson, say, and quickly pen a “book” about your theory of Disruptive Blue-Sky Thinking in Game-Changing Workplaces, that bestseller tag helps establish you as an expert, which helps you land lucrative gigs and generally parlay your faux fame into a real fortune.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest A strong personal brand is now ‘an essential part of competing in the economy’. Illustration: Leon Edler

The Amazon Bestseller scam is a prime example of what you could call modern “egonomics”. If you want to be successful in the age of the internet, then image is everything. And so numerous services have sprung up that allow you to optimise your “personal brand” by fair means or foul: you can buy fake followers to inflate your social media presence; you can get a search engine specialist to put your website on the first page of Google; you can even hire a “Tinder consultant” to enhance your online dating profile.

The idea of everyone having a personal brand has been around for a while. It’s generally thought to have been popularised by a 1997 Fast Company article, The Brand Called You, which explains that “We are CEOs of our own companies: Me Inc. To be in business today, our most important job is to be head marketer for the brand called You.” But while “your personal brand” has long been a gimmicky phrase, normally uttered entirely unselfconsciously by people with “guru” in their job title and a picture of themselves in their wallets, it’s now starting to become an undeniably important aspect of everyday life. Indeed, it’s an essential part of “competing in the economy,” says Dan Schwabel, a personal branding expert and author of Promote Yourself: The New Rules For Building An Outstanding Career.

In part this has to do with the rise of freelancing as a career; more and more people are actually becoming CEOs of “Me, Inc”, turning self-promotion into a necessity. According to a recent report by the Association of Independent Professionals and the Self Employed (Ipse), between 2008 and 2016 the number of freelancers in the UK increased by 43%. “The future is freelance” proclaims the report, noting that “there are few signs of the growth in freelancing slowing down any time soon”. And this trend extends outside the UK. In the US, freelancers make up 35% of workers, according to a survey released last year by the Freelancers Union.

Having an amazing personal Twitter feed can become a lucrative career in itself

Having a strong personal brand essentially just means having a strong reputation. However, all too often this is measured by the size of your social media following. Indeed, in industries like the media, having a large social following that you can leverage to amplify your employer’s brand, has become a huge competitive advantage, if not a prerequisite for being hired. Take, for example, a recent job advert for a news editor role at Mic, an American news startup that caters to millennials. The advert stipulates that not only do you have to “identify, assign, edit and publish at least 10 articles per day” (as a contractor, rather than a full-time employee) but you “must have” an “amazing personal Twitter feed”.

Having an “amazing personal Twitter feed” doesn’t just help you land an extremely stressful job at a millennial-focused publication, it can become a lucrative career in itself. A large number of advertising dollars are now being diverted away from traditional media channels towards “influencers”, people with large social followings who are paid to endorse brands. According to influencer tech firm Hypr, influencers with 500,000 to one million followers across social platforms can make between $5,000 and $10,000 per post. And estimates from eMarketer show that globally, in 2016, marketers spent $570m on influencer marketing on Instagram alone. Tom Buontempo, president at Attention, a social media agency, explains that “the influencer economy is growing in popularity in part because it’s more difficult for marketers to reach their audiences because of adblockers.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Constantly promoting yourself on social media can be very tiring. It can also make you very tiresome. Illustration: Leon Edler

If you are eyeing up a career as an influencer but have no skills, don’t worry – you can just steal other people’s work. There are numerous high-profile social media accounts that traffic entirely in “aggregated” content. Take, for example, Josh Ostrovsky, the man behind the extremely popular Instagram account @TheFatJewish, whose success he then parlayed into a wine brand: White Girl Rosé. Ostrovsky rose to popularity by apparently taking other people’s jokes and sharing them on his Instagram account, all packaged up under the brand of the “The Fat Jew”. This annoyed lots of comedians who claimed they had their work stolen, but accusations of plagiarism didn’t hurt Ostrovsky’s career and he was signed to talent agency CAA. After all, egonomics rewards those who monetise, not necessarily those who create. Talent imitates but internet genius unashamedly steals.

You can also catapult your way to internet fame and fortune by monetising your pet through something like The Dog Agency

In today’s world, you can also catapult your way to internet fame and fortune by monetising your pet through something like The Dog Agency, a New York-based company that describes itself as the “first management agency focusing exclusively on animal influencers”. The agency explains that they “handpick and cultivate the best talent to create premium content that appeals to fans and brands alike, as well as strategically connect the dots and streamline the collaboration process between our celebrity animal clients, brands and media”. According to MarketWatch, influential dogs can make up to $10,000 per Instagram post. And it’s not just dogs that are lucrative. Esther The Wonder Pig has 379,000 followers and is a New York Times bestseller.

Constantly promoting yourself or your wonder pig on social media can be very tiring. It can also make you very tiresome. Do you really need to be doing it to get ahead? Not everyone is convinced. Last year, Cal Newport, an associate professor of computer science at Georgetown University, wrote an op-ed for the New York Times headlined Quit Social Media: Your Career May Depend on It. Newport argues that “dedication to cultivating your social media brand … diverts your time and attention away from producing work that matters and toward convincing the world that you matter. The latter activity is seductive, especially for many members of my generation who were raised on this message, but it can be disastrously counterproductive.”

David Leavitt, a freelance reporter, is an example of just how counterproductive it can be. As news began to break about the Manchester bombing in May, Leavitt went on Twitter, where he has 60,000 followers, and wrote “MULTIPLE CONFIRMED FATALITIES at Manchester Arena. The last time I listened to Ariana Grande I almost died too.” Thinking that one joke about dead children might not be enough, he followed it up with: “Honestly, for over a year I thought an Ariana Grande was something you ordered at Starbucks.” After much backlash he apologised for his remarks, saying “Sorry 4 offending. Didn’t realise the magnitude of the tragedy. I always make stupid jokes about whatever’s trending. Condolences 2 families.”

Leavitt’s jokes were disgusting and rightly reviled but the thing is, while he clearly miscalculated the Manchester bombing, it’s this impulse to turn every news event into an opportunity for self-promotion that probably got him 60,000 followers and freelance writing gigs in the first place. And indeed, while few comments are as crass as those made by Leavitt, enormous numbers of people use tragedies as a way to further their personal brand. After all, you are guaranteed to get a few retweets by posting the likes of #thoughtsandprayers the moment breaking news of an atrocity hits. Extra points if you can somehow make a tragedy about you and explain to the world, for example, how “this latest act of terrorism in London was really close to my heart because I went on holiday to London once”.

Newport isn’t the only person to have turned his back on social media as the route to success. In 2015, an Australian teenager with more than 612,000 Instagram followers who said she made “$2000AUD a post EASY” for marketing products online, deleted her account. Essena O’Neill, then 18, described the platform as “contrived perfection made to get attention”.

Newport and O’Neill are probably in the minority when it comes to their attitudes towards social media self-promotion, however. Most people are desperately doing whatever they can to get attention – including shelling out loads of money. Late last year VaynerMedia, a New York-based marketing agency introduced VaynerTalent, a personal branding service for rich individuals. It costs $25,000 a month, for which you get a team of personal branding specialists creating content for you. Lindsay Blum, who helped launch VaynerTalent with Gary Vaynerchuk tells me there has already been a lot of interest in the service and a number of successful business executives have signed up. “There are definitely people out there who think it’s narcissistic, but in today’s day and age, if you’re not telling your story, you’re giving up a lot of opportunity and equity,” Blum says.

If you can’t afford the $25,000 a month for VaynerTalent, don’t despair. I’ve got a reasonably priced bestselling book on personal branding coming out on Amazon soon: Defeating the Patriarchy with Retweets: a Feminist Guide to Self Promotion. In the meantime, please do follow me (and my dog) on all the social channels.