The airlines would prefer this never happened. An empty seat to them means a lost fare and lower profit.

In recent years, they have become pretty good at making sure their flights are packed to capacity. The industry’s load factor, airline terminology for the percentage of seats that are filled, has been largely rising over the last decade to nearly 80 percent last year, according to the International Air Transport Association.

“It’s hard to game the system,” said John F. Thomas, an industry analyst with L.E.K. Consulting in Boston. “Airlines are running at record load levels.”

For me, the game begins before I even book a ticket. When I traveled to Latvia and Lithuania last year, my main options from New York were connecting through Frankfurt, Moscow or Warsaw. Frankfurt had the most options with Lufthansa. That’s where I went because my assumption is that multiple carriers and departure times to the same destination will increase my chances.

In the same vein, I look for flights at odd hours, which are less popular with travelers. The middle of the day, for instance, is generally a quieter time for the hourly shuttle flights that operate between New York, Boston and Washington.

Then I look at a plane’s configuration on SeatGuru, which has seat maps for every plane and most airlines, since carriers often arrange cabins differently.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

On an international flight, I prefer a nine-seat row in coach, where seats are grouped in threes. This means most rows have three middle seats, the least appealing piece of real estate on any plane and the last to fill up. An eight-seat configuration (with a two-four-two layout) has only two middle seats. Simple mathematics.

Then, when I book the flight, I choose an aisle seat toward the back of the plane. The front tends to fill up faster, and the back last because passengers generally want to get off quickly. I also aim for a row where the middle seat is empty, but where the window or aisle is already booked. Groups of two or more will have to look elsewhere. And typically passengers traveling alone will pick a middle seat only if nothing else is available.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On international flights, where the planes are usually bigger, I also stick to the center section. Those middle seats are the farthest from the window, which to others can feel the most claustrophobic on cramped flights.

After picking my seat, my behavior turns toward the obsessive. I check the carrier’s website again and again to see how the plane is filling up, sometimes multiple times a day as the departure date approaches. If the middle seat next to me is suddenly occupied, I try to move to a better spot.

A week out, the carrier’s seat map can change frequently. Elite fliers are upgraded. Airlines unblock seats. The 24-hour mark, when many airlines allow passengers to check in online, can set off a whole new wave of changes.

“That is when you really have the most movement, and the seats you don’t have to pay for open up,” said Jami Counter, the senior director of flights for TripAdvisor.

I make one last attempt at the airport. Agents can tell you how close to full a flight is and the likelihood that an empty seat will stay empty once passengers on standby are taken care of. Politeness pays. So does a plaintive plea.

If you finally board the plane and see an empty seat in your row, don’t get too confident. Everything can still change in the last 30 minutes before the plane leaves. Some frequent fliers may try to catch an earlier flight. Or passengers from a canceled flight are rebooked on yours. Until the cabin door closes, that empty seat can always disappear.

Next month, I’m headed to Thailand on vacation, and the panic has already set in. My cheap fare on Cathay Pacific doesn’t allow me to pick a seat until two days out.

Needless to say, I plan to log on exactly 48 hours beforehand (setting my alarm clock for 1:30 a.m.) to make sure I can choose the best seat on the plane.