Being a parent is an experience as old as the human race. Being a parent in a plugged-in world of intensifying work-life pressures, increasing economic and political uncertainty, and endless "mommy wars"? That's a whole different story.

While many of the the essential principles of raising a successful, happy child are eternal (love kid, avoid breakage), new challenges and pressures are continually popping up. Thankfully, so too are new scientific findings that can help overwhelmed parents navigate the choppy waters of modern child-rearing and aid them in figuring out the parenting philosophy that works best for their family. Here are a few recent such studies that seem especially useful.

1. Helicopter parenting is depressing.

You've probably heard helicopter parents criticized for raising incompetent, fragile, needy children. But what you might not know is that sheltering your kids from every knock and scratch may also increase their chances of becoming depressed when they reach college. A 2013 study of undergraduates found "links between 'helicopter parenting' and higher levels of depression amongst the students," PsyBlog reports.

2. Strict discipline hurts creativity and even behavior.

According to Wharton professor Adam Grant, research has found that the more rules a household has, the less creative the kids in it tend to be. According to PsyBlog, being strict has other even more worrying affects as well: "A study of 967 US families found that harsh verbal discipline at 13-years-old predicted worse behavior in the next year (Wang et al., 2013). And it didn't help if parents had a strong bond with their children."

3. Regular bedtime will make your kid smarter.

Fighting with your three-year-old every day at bedtime is a drag, but it just might be worth it according to a 2013 study of 11,000 children aged three to seven. It found that irregular bedtimes have negative impacts on brain power throughout childhood, but the effects were strongest for the youngest members of the study.

"Irregular bedtimes at three years of age were associated with lower scores in reading, math, and spatial awareness in both boys and girls, suggesting that around the age of three could be a sensitive period for cognitive development," reports the study release.

4. Kids who watched TV as babies do worse in school.

There's a reason the current advice from pediatricians is no screen time at all for kids under two, and no more than two hours a day after that. A 2013 study of 2,000 Canadian kids found that those who exceeded these guidelines later struggled more in kindergarten, showing worse vocabulary, math, and motor skills. (And no, I can't keep my toddler away from the iPad either, but that's the science.)

5. Kids who exercise do better in school.

There is heaps of science showing that exercise boosts brain performance, so this one probably shouldn't come as much of a shock, but in case you were doubt, here are the facts, according to the Washington Post: "A strong body of research supports the link between physical fitness and test scores."

The complete article lists a ton of studies in support of this conclusion, but UC San Diego professor James Sallis sums them all up neatly with this quote: "This is a very consistent finding, that physically fit kids do better in school."

6. Bribing your kid for good behavior might make them materialistic.

Science has long suggested that bribing your kid with treats or gifts can get in the way of them developing intrinsic motivation to behave well -- you're not going to focus on the larger rewards of studying, for instance, if you're only aiming for an A to get that new video game -- but the practice might also have other serious, long-term effects.

A recent study, "found that when parents use material objects to reward children for good behavior or performance (or take them away when they're bad), those children grow up to be adults who associate buying and owning nice things with success and accomplishment. If you get material rewards as a child, you will believe, more than other adults, 'that products are important to the construction and expression of the self,'" reports the New York Times.

In short, bribing your kids is likely to encourage them to be materialistic. If that worries you (and it probably should), you might want to switch to another method of keeping order at home.

7. Being a working mom is good for your kids.

Don't feel guilty if you have to work, or if you simply want to. It can be heart-rending to drop a crying toddler off at daycare, but you're not harming your kids, according to the latest science. In fact, you're probably helping them to grow up to be successful (and equitable) adults.

That's the conclusion of a huge recent study of 50,000 adults from across the world, which found that daughters of working mothers worked more often, earned more, and reached more senior positions. As for sons, their careers were unaffected by whether their moms worked, but those with employed mothers did end up spending more time on housework and childcare.

8. Dads who do more chores raise more ambitious daughters.

Want your daughter to shoot for the moon? You should probably roll up your sleeves and get your hands sudsy then. That's the conclusion of one recent (though admittedly small) study that found fathers who help with household chores are more likely to raise ambitious daughters with big (and lucrative) career dreams.

"It is crucial that dads 'walk the walk' - because their daughters clearly are watching," commented the study's lead author Alyssa Croft.