Now that the holidays are over, you are probably looking for a fat loss diet plan. Well, if you need to trim up and shed some fat, then this diet plan will definitely help.

Diets trump exercise every time when it comes to fat loss. So if you keep one resolution, make it the one where you stick to your eating plan.

One of the many problems with diets is that people make them more complicated than they have to be. One person is telling you to watch your serving portions, and another is asking you to count your calories.

It’s all a bit of a headache if you ask me. This diet is for non-vegetarians.

However, vegetarians can use it too by tweaking and substituting things here and there (i.e. legumes for meat, etc.).

Let’s get started by cleaning out your fridge and cupboards! Make sure all boxed, and packaged items are trashed. All those low-fat oatmeal raisin cookies, boxed meals, and carb-filled pancake mixes must vanish.

Toss out anything beige-colored that is boxed or wrapped in plastic: bagels, wheat bread, tortillas, oats and such.

Yes, I know that whole wheat, millet, barley, and oats have fiber and protect your heart, colon, arteries, etc., but they also carry nasty anti-nutrients that can cause havoc if consumed in abundance.

You want to replace beige food for more dark greens and colorful fruit, being careful to eat more greens and vegetables than fruit. Fruit can be problematic when it comes to losing fat because it is incredibly easy to overeat.

A quick little explanation: beige foods (grains) tend to be very high in sugar (referring to the breakdown of carbs and glucose), spiking insulin higher than you want it to be.

Chronic grain consumption can cause fat gain effortlessly. To stop this, we need to avoid high insulin spiking foods, which mostly come from grains, but also from sweets and refined carbs.

I know what you are thinking (it’s the same question I get asked every day), “so what am I going to eat then?” Those who usually ask aren’t exquisite cooks or haven’t made anything other than a peanut butter and jelly sandwich (much like myself before I learned the benefits of cooking fresh meals).

When you go shopping, stick to the outside perimeter of the grocery store. If you’re wondering if you can eat something, ask yourself what’s in it. If the answer is the name of the food (ex: what’s in a banana? A banana), then it’s good for you to eat.

In order to help you out, I put together this brief list of meat, nuts/seeds, vegetables, and fruits to broaden your horizon in the world of real food.

Approved Foods for Fat Loss Diet Plan

MEAT

• Beef

• Chicken

• Salmon

• Buffalo

• Shrimp

VEGETABLES

• Kale

• Spinach

• Broccoli

• Cabbage

• Collard Greens

FRUIT

• Apples

• Pears

• Avocado

• Kiwi

• Persimmons

NUTS/SEEDS

• Almonds

• Walnuts

• Pistachios

• Pumpkin seeds

• Macadamia nuts

• Pecans

Notice that these are whole foods and are not processed or refined. Now it’s time to put it all together and make some tasty meals.

Fat Loss Diet Plan: BREAKFAST

Option 1:

Almond-Meal



½ cup of raw almonds

½ cup of water

1 medium-sized apple

Mix in a blender. Pour into pot to simmer.

Option 2:

Traditional

3 Eggs

3-5 Bacon Slices (fresh cut)

1 large orange

Fat Loss Diet Plan: Snack (if needed)

Option 1:

Apple and almond butter

Option 2:

Handful of macadamia nuts

Fat Loss Diet Plan: LUNCH

Option 1:

Tuna Salad

1 ½ cans of tuna

Black olives

Jalapenos

Avocado

Tomato

Onion

Lettuce

Toss it all together. Add extra virgin olive oil and vinegar to taste.

Option 2:

Chicken & Veggie Stir Fry

Chicken

Red cabbage

Mushrooms

Beets

Bell Peppers

Grill the chicken with coconut oil and seasoning/s of your choice. Stir fry the rest with coconut oil, salt and pepper.

Fat Loss Diet Plan: Snack (if needed)

Option 1:

1-2 Hardboiled eggs

Option 2:

Apple with almond butter

Fat Loss Diet Plan: Dinner

Option 1:

Beef Ribs (oven)

Beef ribs

Green collards

Mushrooms

Asparagus

Cook the beef ribs in the oven with pepper, sea salt, and basil. Stir fry the green collards, mushrooms, and asparagus with coconut oil, salt, and pepper.

Option 2:

Carne Asada

Carne asada (marinated flank steak)

Avocado

Tomato

Onion

Cabbage

Yellow squash

Grill the Carne Asada. Mix the rest of the vegetables into a salad with oil and vinegar dressing.

Get the idea? Get creative with your meals! Learn how to throw a nice mix of protein, carbs, and fats together and watch your waistline shrink.

The key is to not eat too much. If you feel full, stop. if there’s food left on your plate, put it in a container and save it for the next day.

To perform your best, you need optimal nutrition. Drink plenty of water, avoid empty calories such as sweets and baked goods, and refrain from reaching for that whole wheat bagel with cream cheese!