It spreads.

The wind permits Isaac's words to travel only a few feet before it whips them into oblivion, but that is enough to reach the ears of several people here on this far end of the cooler, including those of Matt and Michaela, who are squeezed against the rest but still squatting together, Matt holding Michaela, Michaela holding Tinkerbell. They are praying silently, preparing themselves to die.

They look up.

"I love you all," shouts Matt.

"I love everyone," shouts Michaela.

And then the people around Matt and Michaela hear the words, and so on, and the words travel in this way down the length of the cooler, and even the people who don't repeat the words hear the words.

Most Popular

Finally, at the far end of the cooler, the words reach Ruben Carter. The roof just inside the door of the cooler has collapsed almost all the way to the ground and somehow instead of crushing him it has simply pushed him forward, like toothpaste at the bottom of a tube. He doesn't know who said the words. The wind has stripped them of even their sex, leaving behind only their sentiment.

Ruben raises his head.

"I love all of you!" he shouts back into the crowd.

Then he drops his head again and closes his eyes and waits for whatever comes next.

Trace, eleven-year-old Trace, with his buzz cut and his grass-stained baseball uniform, is looking up at Corey, smiling, showing him something cradled in the palm of his hand.

It is a hailstone the size of a golf ball.

The wind is still howling and the cooler is still shaking and Corey's back is still being pelted with debris and he wonders if the kid is in shock.

But Trace, who used to be kind of obsessed with tornadoes, who spent fifth grade exercising his library card to learn everything he could on the subject, who knows that hail is associated with their edges, and that therefore, if you are hit by a tornado, hail is a sign that the worst is over, continues to smile up at Corey, showing off his melting jewel.

More hail falls around them now, bouncing and pinging and ricocheting, making a joyful noise.

"Is everyone okay below me?"

"I'm okay!"

"I'm trying not to lay on someone."

"Somebody is on my back."

"Am I hurting anybody?"

"Who's under me?"

"Is anyone under me?"

"Everybody stay calm. It's over."

"Are you okay back there? Are you okay?"

"Oh, I'm sorry."

"Be careful, there's glass on your back!"

"Are you okay?"

"I'm great."

"I'm okay. I'm okay."

"I love you, Mama."

"I love you, too. I love you."

"Ma'am, are you okay?"

"I'm okay."

"Is that you right below me?"

"Yeah."

"That's not someone else?"

"No."

There is the rich smell of upturned earth, like the smell of a freshly plowed field. There is the yeasty smell of spilled beer and the thick smell of wet plaster and the sharp smell of split wood. There is the faint smell of something burning, and the strong smell of gas.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

There are a number of holes in what remains of the cooler's roof, but the biggest is on the end farthest from where the door used to be. The wall there is tipped at a steep angle, and there is a ragged gash near the top, where it should join the ceiling. Corey, who likes to scramble around the cliffs south of Joplin, climbs up the slick aluminum slope and pulls himself up over the lip and looks out over the edge and takes in what he sees, but when he looks back down he doesn't tell anyone, because there isn't really anything he can say, so he just tells them the most important thing.

"We can make it out."

Michaela gives Tinkerbell to someone to hold, and then she climbs up a pyramid of Miller Lite cases that Carl has built at the base of the tilted wall. She reaches up to Corey and Isaac, who are balancing together at the top of the wall, and then they pull her up.

She looks around.

The skies above are still cloudy, but it's no longer dark and she can see plenty far. About thirty feet away is what used to be a maple tree. Most of its bark has been stripped off, along with most of its branches, and so the tree looks sort of like a gnarled and lumber-colored telephone pole. High above the tree's base, wrapped around its trunk, is a crumpled mass of gray and black metal. This used to be a pickup truck or an SUV, but it is impossible to tell which. There are other vehicles and parts of vehicles scattered everywhere, including an upside-down maroon Hyundai sedan that lies on the rubble of the Fastrip, maybe three feet from the edge of the half-collapsed roof of the cooler. Beyond the stripped tree, Michaela can see a small field with cows in it. Pieces of wood and metal are sticking out of the sides of some of the cows and others don't have all of their legs and the ones that aren't already dead will be soon enough. Where houses should be, for as far as Michaela can see, there are just stone foundations, stubbly with splintered wood. Here and there, against the backdrop of white sky, pockets of fire and smoke rise.

For the past couple of weeks, there's been a lot of talk on the news about some preacher in California who'd been predicting that the end of the world, the Rapture, would happen on May 21. That was yesterday. Michaela hadn't paid much attention, because she believes what the Bible says, which is that even the angels don't know when the end will come. Now Michaela wonders if the preacher was only one day off.

She wonders if she has been left behind.

An empty lattice of wooden beams that must once have been part of a wall is wedged up against the other side of the cooler, and Michaela uses it to lower herself to the ground. She's wearing flip-flops, and she takes a few ginger steps forward, careful to avoid stepping on glass or nails or other sharp debris.

Then she turns and waits for Matt and Tinkerbell to join her.

Some small chunks of flying glass buried themselves deep in Ruben's right hand while he was helping everyone get inside the cooler, but during the long wait to get out, his hand doesn't hurt at all. His legs, though, are cramping up bad. He cramps easily. It's one of the symptoms of his cerebral palsy.

Symptoms doesn't seem like the right word, really, because it's not like it's a disease or sickness that comes and then goes away or a terminal condition that gets progressively worse. It's a static thing, with him since birth. It's possible it was caused by the manner of his birth, though nobody can say for sure. He was born wrong, feetfirst, and it took the doctors and nurses a while to get him free and breathing on his own, and maybe that's when the damage happened. Regardless, he's never known anything else, any other way of life, of living. He has damage to parts of his brain, and because of this damage he has trouble controlling his muscles, and when his muscles are forced into an awkward position for an extended period of time, as happened when the roof collapsed and pressed him down into this sort of fetal squat, they cramp.

He watches while the others crawl and scramble and are pushed out the exit. Eventually Ruben and Chris are the only ones left inside. Ruben makes his way to the leaning wall at the back. He steps onto the little pyramid of Miller Lite boxes and he stretches up and he grips the top of the wall and starts pulling himself up toward the opening. The wall is slick with rain and some blood is leaking down it from the wound in his hand and he is sort of kicking against the wet aluminum and his feet are slipping and he isn't making progress and so Chris comes up behind him and takes a hold of his legs and pushes.

Ruben emerges headfirst, blinking in the brightening sun.

Ruben, Matt and Michaela, Rick and Hannah and Abby and Jonah, Stacy, Aaron and Allie, Donna, Jennifer and Carl and Trace and Cory, Lacey and Chris and Jarrett and Nathan, Sandy, Isaac and Corey and Brennan. They wait till they've all made it out, and then they pick their way through the debris to Twentieth Street, and they know that it is Twentieth Street because they can see the concrete roundabout at the corner, and it's still the same even if nothing else is.

They get their bearings. The orange and beige ruins on the left side of Twentieth, about three quarters of a mile from where they are, must be the Home Depot, which means downtown lies that way.

They begin to disperse, walking away from one another, alone or in small groups, every destination different.