Crowd-Pleasing Vegan Caesar Salad

My dad is coming to visit this week. This means two very important things are on my “what to make dad” menu. 1) Chili, always and 2) Caesar salad. Those are essential food groups for the guy. Anything else is icing on the cake. Plus, I always welcome the opportunity to use my huge bamboo salad bowl that we received as a wedding gift from our friends. When this bowl comes out, it’s something special!

Even though Caesar salad isn’t traditional holiday fare, I totally think you can serve it as part of a holiday menu. I love an unexpected twist on the table personally. Do you have any non-traditional dishes that are go-to’s for your family? My mother-in-law used to always serve Caesar salad as part of Thanksgiving and Christmas dinner and I swear it was one of the things that went the fastest, next to her famous croquettes. And my dad, well…let’s just say his famous Caesar salad and chili make an appearance at every Christmas Eve and New Year’s Eve gathering.

I’ve made a couple vegan Caesar salad recipes over the years (one of which is in my cookbook), but I think this version is my best rendition yet. Recipes are always works in progress for me and I find each time I make it, I’m always trying new things. In addition to a new dressing, I also added roasted chickpea croutons and a nut and seed based parmesan cheese. I used a blend of traditional romaine lettuce with non-traditional Lacinato kale (destemmed of course). This way you have the classic flavour of romaine with the nutritional boost of the kale, without scaring anyone away (ahem, dad). I love the two tone greens in the bowl too. It’s a great make ahead salad because you can prep everything the day before (except for the roasted chickpeas) and then just mix it up the day of your event!

The first time I made this dressing, I actually used double the quantities you’ll see in the recipe below. However, I found that it made way too much (I had half leftover after mixing the salad), so I cut the dressing ingredients in half and it still worked out fine in the blender. I’m just mentioning this in case you are wondering about making a larger batch for a crowd – this dressing doubles beautifully!

I had a lot of fun with the photoshoot for this recipe, so I’ll let the photos do the rest of the talking.

And in case I’m not back again this week, I’d like to wish my American readers a lovely Thanksgiving! Thank you for coming here each week and eagerly trying out so many of the recipes I share. If you’re looking for my favourite Thanksgiving recipes, you can find them here. Also check out my 3 Course Step-by-Step Vegan and Gluten-Free Holiday Menu.

4.9 from 159 reviews fromreviews Crowd-Pleasing Vegan Caesar Salad Vegan, gluten-free, grain-free, no bake/raw, refined sugar-free By Angela Liddon This is a delicious, creamy vegan Caesar salad that will wow any crowd! Everyone who’s tried it goes absolutely nuts over it, and it’s my most popular salad recipe on the blog. To take it over the top, I garnish the salad with a generous amount of crunchy Roasted Chickpea Croutons and a delectable Nut and Seed Parmesan Cheese for the ultimate vegan Caesar salad. The dressing recipe easily doubles for a larger group and it’ll keep in the fridge in a sealed container for a few days so you can make it in advance. Dressing adapted from My Vega. Yield

5-6 small bowls Prep Time

45 Minutes Cook time

35 Minutes Total Time

1 Hour, 20 Minutes Ingredients: For the Roasted Chickpea Croutons: 1 (15-ounce) can chickpeas (or 1 1/2 cups cooked), drained and rinsed

1 teaspoon extra-virgin olive oil

1/2 teaspoon fine grain sea salt

1/2 teaspoon garlic powder

1/8 to 1/4 teaspoon cayenne pepper (optional) For the Caesar Dressing (makes 3/4-1 cup): 1/2 cup raw cashews, soaked overnight

1/4 cup water

2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil

1 tablespoon lemon juice

1/2 tablespoon Dijon mustard

1/2 teaspoon garlic powder

1 small garlic clove (you can add another if you like it super potent)

1/2 tablespoon vegan Worcestershire sauce (I use Wizard's gluten-free brand)

2 teaspoons capers

1/2 teaspoon fine grain sea salt and pepper, or to taste For the Nut and Seed Parmesan Cheese: 1/3 cup raw cashews

2 tablespoons hulled hemp seeds

1 small garlic clove

1 tablespoon nutritional yeast

1 tablespoon extra-virgin olive oil

1/2 teaspoon garlic powder

fine grain sea salt, to taste For the lettuce: 1 small/medium bunch lacinato kale, destemmed (5 cups chopped)

2 small heads romaine lettuce (10 cups chopped) Directions: Soak cashews in a bowl of water overnight, or for at least a few hours. Drain and rinse. Roast chickpea croutons: Preheat oven to 400°F. Drain and rinse chickpeas. Place chickpeas in a tea towel and rub dry (it's okay if some skins fall off). Place onto large rimmed baking sheet. Drizzle on oil and roll around to coat. Sprinkle on the garlic powder, salt, and optional cayenne. Toss to coat. Roast for 20 minutes at 400°F, then gently roll the chickpeas around in the baking sheet. Roast for another 10 to 20 minutes, until lightly golden. They will firm up as they cool. Prepare the dressing: Add the cashews and all other dressing ingredients (except salt) into a high-speed blender, and blend on high until the dressing is super smooth. You can add a splash of water if necessary to get it blending. Add salt to taste and adjust other seasonings, if desired. Set aside. Prepare the Parmesan cheese: Add cashews and garlic into a mini food processor and process until finely chopped. Now add in the rest of the ingredients and pulse until the mixture is combined. Salt to taste. Prepare the lettuce: Destem the kale and then finely chop the leaves. Wash and dry in a salad spinner. Place into extra large bowl. Chop up the romaine into bite-sized pieces. Rinse and then spin dry. Place into bowl along with kale. You should have roughly 5 cups chopped kale and 10 cups chopped romaine. Assemble: Add dressing onto lettuce and toss until fully coated. Season with a pinch of salt and mix again. Now sprinkle on the roasted chickpeas and the Parmesan cheese. Serve immediately.

Recipient's email * (Seperate Email Addresses with comma)

Your Name *

Please fill in the code below *

Let's get social! Follow Angela on Instagram (@ohsheglows + @theglowspot), Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Snapchat, and Google+

