The Best Multivitamins For Men

Presenting The Seven Best Multivitamins For Men

You might remember popping multivitamins at some point in your life. It was probably right before breakfast. The pill was sitting on the counter, next to a half-full glass of water. Or maybe you tried multivitamins the last time you decided to clean up your diet again. But are these food supplements helping?

"I don't think there's a one-size-fits-all way to make a recommendation," says Montreal-based naturopathic doctor Lisa Samet.

A study in the Journal of American Medical Association published in October found that in 2011-12, 31% of adults surveyed said they took a multivitamin/multimineral supplement, which is down from the 37% of those surveyed in 1999-2000.

“General multivitamins can be helpful for some individuals, but not necessary for all,” says Albert Ahn MD, clinical instructor of internal medicine at NYU Langone Medical Center in New York City. “The latest consensus from recent studies shows that there aren’t specific, significant benefits to taking multivitamins in normal, healthy, young people.” In fact, these same studies have found that too much of certain vitamins can actually cause harm.

Jonathan Valdez, a New York-based Telehealth-registered dietician, nutritionist and certified personal trainer, says he would only recommend a multivitamin to someone on a low-calorie weight loss diet – think 1,200 calories a day or less. But if you're on an otherwise "normal" diet, eating around 2,000 calories daily and "your diet is varied with fruits, vegetables, and lean protein, then a multivitamin will either be useless or dangerous."

And that's where the debate on multivitamins stands. Some doctors and experts say that multivitamins can be a helpful supplement and at the very least will not have an adverse effects, while others like Valdez say that if a multivitamin provides more than 50 percent of your daily needs, it may even cause toxicity.

The best way to get the vitamins and minerals your body needs to stay healthy on a daily basis is through your food. Eating a balanced diet packed with protein, vegetables, fats, fruits, and carbohydrates is the best route. But that's the thing: Many Americans aren't following a healthy diet. Naturopathy, which Samet studies, is a method of alternative medicine based on the theory that diseases can be treated without pharmaceutical drugs and through natural means such as lifestyle changes. Samet disagrees with the theory that taking a multivitamin can cause you any harm.

"I think a good vitamin is helpful for someone who eats on the run and doesn't sit down and have good meals on a regular basis," she says. "What I can tell you for sure is that it's not going to hurt anybody."

However, Samet does caution against any multivitamin that includes magnesium stearate, starch, cellulose or any food colourings or additives.

"In this case, price and value do make a difference," she says. "So I would say the more expensive it is, the better ingredients it probably has."

Douglas Laboratories - Ultra Preventive X

This isn't your average once-a-day multi. This organic vitamin supplement from Douglas contains no soy, dairy, gluten, sodium, sugar, starch, artificial colorings or flavoring. But it recommend eight tablets daily with a meal in divided doses. So you can take four, for example, with breakfast and the other half with dinner.

$42.80 at Amazon.com.

Metagenics Multivitamin

Sure, these are expensive. So are the Douglas vitamins. But like Samet said, you literally get what you pay for here and if you need to supplement it's best to go after the best ingredients you can get. This product, which requires a daily dose of six tablets, is designed for high potency and features mineral amino acid chelates for mineral absorption and is also non-GMO and gluten free. You can pick these up with or without iron depending on your needs.

$47.33 at Amazon.com

One A Day Men’s

An Amazon best-seller, this brand is probably one you’ve heard of before. It contains all the vitamin D you need if you aren’t seeing the sun during the day, as well as vitamin C, calcium, magnesium, and potassium. These ingredients help to maintain blood pressure, promote heart health, and protect the cells in your body.

$13.92 at Amazon.com

Nature Made Multi For Him

The 90 tablets in this bottle each contain 25 essential vitamins and minerals including vitamin C, D, calcium, folic acid, and a very good amount of magnesium. It can help you kick that sluggish feeling by providing some energy. If you’re not a fish eater though, be aware it does contain some ingredients from fish.

$8.54 at Amazon.com

Optimum Nutrition Opti-Men

Not only does this multivitamin contain vitamins D, C and Bs, but it also has a blend of amino acids including glutamine and BCAAs, which help you build muscle. They also contain an enzyme blend, too. Take three together with your first meal, or spread them out throughout the day. They’re perfect for anyone with a fit lifestyle.

$19.95 at Amazon.com

Garden of Life Vitamin Code Men’s Multivitamin

Calling all vegetarians—this gluten-free, dairy-free multi is for you! Each capsule contains live probiotics and antioxidants to help keep you feeling your best. Plus, there’s vitamin E and zinc, which promote prostate health. This vitamin can help improve mental and physical energy, too.

$30.22 at Amazon.com

Vitafusion Men’s

You can be an adult and still hit up the gummy vitamins. They have the daily vitamins and minerals you need, plus a tasty sugar coating. It’s packed with vitamins A, C and D, and helps to support your immune system, too.

$9.79 at Amazon.com

AskMen may receive a portion of revenue if you click a link in this article and buy a product or service. The links are independently placed by our Commerce team and do not influence editorial content. To find out more, please read our complete terms of use.