Honey Walnut Shrimp

Here’s a popular dish often found at Chinese restaurants: Honey Walnut Shrimp

I have forever and ever loved this dish and have always wanted to try it at home. It’s one of those major once-in-a-while treats for me though… since it’s deep-fried. I don’t indulge in deep fried treats very often at all! My family was thrilled that I was veering from the mostly healthy dinner “norm” at our house. And I decided to bite the bullet and do some frying!

The shrimp is dipped in a simple batter of egg whites and cornstarch, then fried in hot oil until golden and crispy. The walnuts are quickly and lightly glazed with a coating of sugar.

The fried shrimp are tossed with a sweet honey sauce. I seriously could have sat down and eaten this entire bowl. And I just might do that next time. So good!!

This indulgent dinner recipe was a huge hit with my family. I served the Honey Walnut Shrimp over rice. We ate it with chopsticks. All was delicious! And I survived eating fried food! Next time… I’m totally making fried chicken, which… if you can believe this… I have yet to make!

Yield: 4 servings Prep Time: 15 min Cook Time: 15 min Ingredients: 1 cup water

2/3 cup granulated white sugar

1/2 cup walnuts

4 large egg whites

2/3 cup cornstarch

1/4 cup mayonnaise

1 pound large shrimp, peeled, deveined, tails removed

2 tablespoons honey

1 tablespoon canned sweetened condensed milk (see tips below)

2 cups vegetable or canola oil, for frying chopped green onions, for garnish Directions: 1. In a small pan, dissolve the sugar in the water at medium heat. Bring the sugar-water to a rolling boil, and add the walnuts. Boil for 2 minutes, then drain and place the walnuts on a cutting board to cool and dry. 2. In a medium bowl, whip the egg whites with a whisk until foamy. Whisk in the cornstarch. 3. Heat the oil in a medium saucepan over medium-high heat. It'll be hot enough to cook the shrimp when you flick a drop of water into it and it sizzles. Whisk the egg batter again. Dip the shrimp into the batter and fry in the hot oil until golden brown, about 5 minutes. Remove with a slotted spoon and drain on paper towels. 4. In a medium serving bowl, stir together the mayonnaise, honey and sweetened condensed milk. Add the fried shrimp and toss to coat with the sauce. Sprinkle the candied walnuts on top. Garnish with green onions. Tips: *If you are preparing this recipe as GLUTEN-FREE, just be sure to use brands of mayo and sweetened condensed milk that are known to be GF. *Although this recipe only uses a small amount of sweetened condensed milk, you can store the leftover in a sealed container in the freezer- it freezes well! SOURCE: RecipeGirl.com (adapted from AllRecipes)

More popular Chinese restaurant recipes you might enjoy:

General Tso’s Chicken by Appetite for China

Best Chinese Fried Rice by Steamy Kitchen

Sweet and Sour Chicken by Table for Two

Mongolian Beef by Just a Taste

Chow Mein by Favorite Family Recipes

Leave a Comment