The good, the bad, the LEO.

No one will ever accuse me — a Leo — of being shy, and if they did, it would take approximately .02 seconds for me to set them straight.

Call it confidence. Call it ego. Just call me when you say you will and we should get along fine.

Well, to be fair, there are a few other things you should know about dating a Leo zodiac sign. As the royalty of all zodiacs and ruled by the Sun — the center of the universe — the Leo woman commands attention, respect and passion.

Intelligent, witty, creative and strong, she expects nothing less from those who try to court her and demands nothing less than what she feels she deserves — which more often than not, is someone who respects that she’s intelligent, witty, creative and strong.

And by “she,” of course I mean “me.”

But I think I speak for a majority of my lioness sisters when I say the quickest way to our hearts is to understand our minds. Good luck with that.

1. We can be stubborn.

You say “stubborn.” We say “determined.”

The Leo astrological sign is a fixed fire sign which means we’re proud and often a little bit willful. We seek stability and don’t like to be met with opposition.

Of course, there will be disagreements but when these occur, make sure you state things as kindly and non-judgmentally as possible or the claws will come out.

If we’re upset, apologize but give us space to calm down on our own. Do NOT say, “You should calm down.” We will be determined to maul your face off for that.

RELATED: 10 Reasons Why A Leo Is The BEST Friend You Never Knew You NEEDED

2. We have a bit of an ego.

And despite the confident exterior, it can be easily bruised.

Leos love to be admired and to get praised for their uniqueness and creativity, which means you need to reassure her once in awhile.

Win us over by loving what's unique about our style, the way we live and the fact that you let us know these things when it fits.

RELATED: 20 Truths About Leo Women You NEED To Know

3. We're playful and we love to tease.

Leo women are fun and observant, and we love poking fun of you in harmless ways and teasing you to make you smile. We're playful and will tease you regularly once we're comfortable with you.

In other words, you should be able to take a joke and dish one out, as long as you don't harm our feelings (See #2.)

RELATED: 10 Brutal Truths About Loving A Leo Man

4. We see through your bullshit.

So really, don’t even try. Compliments will get you far but fake compliments and "game" will get you only as far as we can throw you.

Instead, drop the act and take the time to truly admire something about us and make us feel special.

If you're not genuine, we're smart enough to tell from a mile away.

RELATED: 7 Ways To TRULY Love A Leo Woman

5. We do not have time for wimps.

The Leo woman is sharp, quick-witted, funny, and very social and most often wants a man who can keep us on our toes. If you seem insecure, unsure of yourself, that’s a pretty big turn-off.

Don’t be needy, clingy, or constantly asking for validation. We will eat you up and spit you out like the lioness that we are.

But at the same time, Leos don't always want to make decisions or take charge. We want a man who is also strong in his beliefs and ideas and isn't afraid to make decisions or to say what's on his mind. If we disagree, we’ll let you know.

RELATED: 10 Stereotypes About Leos That Are 100% WRONG

6. We need our space.

Leo women are independent and they want to be with men who are just as independent as they are. They want their mates to guide them, but not to control them.

Cling-ons need not apply.

If you want to date a Leo, then you have to be strong and independent yourself or we’ll quickly lose respect for you.

But if you neglect us for too long, we'll become distant and sulky. After all, the Leo woman's pride is always at stake. In other words, you’re going to hear us roar either way. Play your cards right and you’ll be welcomed into that den.

RELATED: This Is What It's REALLY Like To Have Sex With A Leo