The world is getting more technical, and the jobs of the future are increasingly going to require you to be able to code across multiple programming languages, understand network security, and work comfortably with big data.

But trying to add all that expertise to your skill set can be incredibly expensive, and sometimes more time-consuming than actually finding a job.

That's why we've partnered with StackCommerce to create ScienceAlert Academy - a place that offers affordable, top-rated online courses that you can take from the comfort of your own couch, whenever you have the time.

Below are four of the most popular online courses in coding, network security, and big data that you can take right now for less than US$50 per course, no matter where in the world you live - because we believe education should be accessible for everyone.

1. How to Build a $120,000/Year Career as a Web Penetration Tester

What's a web penetration tester? Don't worry, we hadn't heard of it either, but it turns out this is one of the most in-demand tech security careers out there right now.

You'll learn all the basics of ethical hacking - where you use hacking skills for good rather than evil, just like in Mr Robot - and learn how to apply them to test and upgrade a network's security.

Length: 5.5 hours

Cost: US$19

2. C++ for Beginners

If you're pretty much a coding newbie, this course is for you. C++ is one of the most popular programming languages in the world, and it's used across everything from console video games to financial trading.

This immersive course gives you a complete introduction to the basics of C++, including how to write and debug your own code.

Length: 8.5 hours

Cost: US$17

3. Programming Into the Future Bundle

Learning to program according to the most popular languages at the moment is good, but being able to program with the coding languages of the future is even better.

This bundle contains nine different modules that will put you ahead of the curve when it comes to programming, and will teach you a range of different new and emerging languages.

The modules include the Angular 2 Crash Course and Python Web Programming.

Length: 32.5 hours

Cost: Pay what you think the course is worth!

4. The Big Data Bundle

Everyone is talking about big data right now. With more and more people logging onto the internet daily, the world is amassing millions of terabytes of data that could be invaluable for mapping trends in health, population, and demographics... if there are enough people to process it all, that is.

The Big Data Bundle contains nine different courses, with modules such as Oozie: Workflow Scheduling for Big Data Systems, and From 0 to 1: Hive for Big Data Processing.

By the end of the course, you'll be across all the basics of big data, and have a bunch of new skill to add to your resume.

Length: 64.5 hours

Cost: US$45

This is a promotional ScienceAlert Academy post.