Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

MONTH OF September

MONTHLY OVERVIEW:

Set the bar high, Sagittarius. This is your month to start making dynamic and decisive moves. The Sun is having its annual power breakfast in Virgo until September 22, heating up your tenth house of career, ambition and public recognition. Unhook yourself from petty dramas and be rigorous about not sweating the small stuff. You have big plans to accomplish, and you can’t afford to veer off track!

Pumping you up even more: Go-getter Mars will blaze through Virgo and this same part of your chart from September 5 to October 22. Mars only visits here every couple years, and you’ll want to take advantage of its galvanizing presence to get a big goal off the ground. Be assertive when presenting your grand plans and don’t shy away from contacting powerful people in your field, including industry superstars. A celebrity or respected person might be interested in attaching their name to your project, boosting its credibility—and visibility! With the charismatic Sun and Mars in your leadership house, you could see your name in lights, and you can be recognized as an expert on a topic you’ve mastered.

The tenth house rules men and masculine energy, and this cycle puts you in touch with your own “yang” force (which we all have, regardless of gender identity). A helpful guy—or just a straight-shooting person with no-BS business acumen—could aid your ascent this month. Reach out to mentors and experienced people for advice. Your relationship with your dad or a paternal figure could also be in the spotlight. If there’s tension brewing, use this cycle to clear the air instead of waging war.

The September 20 Virgo new moon shoots you out of the cannon, launching a fresh six-month cycle for your career. Set clear-eyed intentions now, because seeds planted today will bear fruit by the corresponding full moon on March 1, 2018. Where would you like to be by then? Map out a few milestones, then reverse-engineer them to identify which steps you’ll take to reach them. This new moon is a great day to commit to a job offer, client or firm course of action. Just watch that part of you that wants to rebel against all that certainty. This new moon will form an exact quincunx (http://astrostyle.com/aspects/quincunx/)—a 150-degree angle of adjustment—to freedom-seeking Uranus, which is in your fifth house of passion and play. Make sure you’re not zapping all the fun and discovery out of your life by committing to a rigid schedule or accepting a too-demanding position. As a free-spirited Sagittarius, you need space to be spontaneous. Honor that!

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

That said, it will feel good to get life into a structured groove, especially after the topsy-turvy summer you’ve had. Not only did the two August eclipses (http://astrostyle.com/august-2017-eclipses/) turn your life inside-out, but communication planet Mercury is retrograde (http://astrostyle.com/mercury-retrograde/) from August 12 to September 5. Until August 31, Mercury was backing through Virgo, throwing a few wrenches into your professional plans. Mercury will wrap up its retrograde in Leo and your outspoken ninth house, which could find you saying the exact wrong thing at the worst possible moment. Apply the strongest possible filters now. Take a time-out from social media instead of engaging with trolls (or accidentally coming across as one yourself). Both Mercury and the ninth house are associated with travel, so if you’re heading anywhere for the last official weekend of summer, be sure to check your (packing) list twice, confirm reservations and leave extra early for the airport.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Home and family are in the spotlight on September 6, when the year’s only Pisces full moon illuminates your domestic fourth house. You could be inspired to transform your living situation, whether that means a new address, a change of roommates or a renovation project. This is the culmination of the February 26 Pisces new moon, which was also an action-packed solar eclipse. Whatever comes together now could be extra significant. With this full moon stoking your urge for nesting and nostalgia, you might expand your family or reconnect with your roots. If you’ve been working exhaustively, pause for a day of self-care. A woman, possibly your mother or a maternal figure, could play an important role.

The vibe lightens on September 22, when the Sun swirls into Libra and your eleventh house of group activity for a month. This may be one of your favorite times of year, Sag, because you’re at your best—mingling with forward-thinking friends and meeting people from all different walks of life. It’s a wonderful time to collaborate or launch a tech-based project, especially one that has a message of social justice.

Your ruling planet, expansive Jupiter, is also wrapping up a 13-month visit to your progressive eleventh house, which runs from September 9, 2016, to October 10, 2017. You’ve expanded so much socially this past year, joining forces with unlikely new people or creating a trailblazing dream team. While you love to be around vibrant people, you’re not always the best at delegating. Risk-taker Jupiter helped you trade your “I’ll just do it myself” M.O. for a more democratic approach. And surprise, surprise: You’ve been able to get a LOT more done by teaming up! With the Sun and Jupiter both in full swing during Libra season, this is an ideal time for networking, throwing parties and getting your message out to the masses.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

But before you start sending out invitations and email blasts, a note of caution. On September 28, outspoken Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition (http://astrostyle.com/aspects/opposite/) with shock jock Uranus in your dramatic and ego-driven fifth house. You might suddenly feel averse to sharing the spotlight (why should someone else get equal credit for YOUR creativity?). Or someone on the Sag Squad could act out with a full-on diva display. If you’re hosting a gathering, don’t be too casual about mixing people who have divergent politics, especially if one is a known button-pusher. An oil-and-water combo could combust and leave you with a hot mess to clean up.

Jupiter and Uranus are two of astrology’s most freedom-loving planets, and they’re battling for attention. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could resurface for a grand finale.

The key at this Jupiter-Uranus face-off is to strike the right balance between drama and detachment. Perhaps you’ve compromised a little too much in your effort to be a team player and now someone else is trying to take credit for your work. You need to confront them, but you also want to do it in a powerful, non-reactive way instead of losing your temper (and your credibility). A disruptive person—possibly an ex-lover or an energy-sucking friend—could reappear and send chaotic ripples through your life. You might get lured into a romantic scenario that you KNOW will turn things upside-down. If you’re craving excitement, there’s a good chance your “boredom” is actually nervous energy. Find an outlet that doesn’t rip through your hard-earned stability like a tornado. And be careful not to take on more than you can humanly handle, even if the initial adrenaline rush spurs you into productivity. This final opposition wants you to learn your limits for once and for all. Chaos comes at a cost, and the price of admission is no longer worth it.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

That same day (September 28), shadowy Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your second house of work, money and daily routines. If you’ve struggled to establish good habits or to keep your finances flowing, Pluto’s course correction will bring stability back. Pluto is the karmic mirror, and any interruptions to your security should have inspired you to look deeper at your own motives. Why WERE you working so hard or freaking out about funds? A challenging client or coworker may have also reflected something you needed to change about yourself. Hopefully you’ve done some soul-searching, identifying limiting beliefs and spiritual blocks to prosperity.

Have you found yourself saying things like “You can’t always get what you want” or “Man plans, God laughs”? If these cliches have turned into rigid worldviews, stop and question them. Your words also create your reality, Archer—so find more empowering phrases to guide you. Mantras (http://upliftconnect.com/mind-blowing-power-mantra/) have been used in Hinduism and Buddhism to quiet the mind and stay in the present. Your sign, which is known for obsessing about the future, might benefit from having one now.

LOVE & ROMANCE:

Cast a wide net or build something solid? You’re of two minds early this month, as the love planets, Venus and Mars, pull you in opposite directions. With romantic Venus in Leo and your worldly ninth house until September 19, part of you is focused on freedom and personal expansion. Venus in this house of possibilities has your mind considering anything BUT the idea of settling down. Singles want to explore every option, and if you’re in a relationship, you may be too distracted by one of your zillion big-idea projects to focus on couple-y stuff. The ninth house rules travel and cross-cultural connections. A spontaneous vacation, even for just one or two nights, could back the lovin’ feeling. Single Sags might connect with a long-distance love interest or someone from a different background. Vive la difference!

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

But before you spread your wings too wide, intensifying Mars swoops into Virgo and your tenth house of structure from September 5 to October 22, setting your sights on long-term commitment. Mars can crank up the pressure, so you might feel stressed about meeting someone’s rather explicit expectations. On the one hand, you don’t want to lose a good thing, but on the other hand, what’s the rush? It could be you who’s talking timelines and ultimatums, perhaps trying to pin down someone who keeps wriggling out of your grasp. Sagittarius, you of all people should understand how unpleasant it feels to be backed into a corner. Give this person some breathing room, and they’ll either come around or admit they’re just looking for short-term fun.

Since the tenth house rules career, an office affair could heat up. You could meet a sexy someone unexpectedly at an industry event or conference. Don’t be too quick to pass on the passed hors d’oeuvres! This trend intensified when Venus joins Mars in Virgo from September 19 to October 14. With the cosmic duo in lockstep, you’ll have less angst about whether or not to take this past the finish line. From now forward, you want something with potential to last for the long haul—or you’d rather not bother!

Opportunity Days:

September 2: Mars-Uranus trine

A blast of honesty may catch you off-guard, causing you to blurt out your true feelings or a desire you’ve been keeping under wraps. As these two outspoken and spontaneous planets align, you might leap without looking—but your gamble may just pay off! Chemistry could blaze up with someone from another zip code, background or culture. Couples might spontaneously plan (or take) a sexy getaway. Just watch your temper, which could heat up as fast as your libido under this explosive but exciting starmap.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 6: Pisces full moon

A full moon in your touchy-feely fourth house brings surprising shifts to the home front, like a move or some other daring lifestyle change.

September 12: Venus-Saturn trine

Talks could turn serious about romantic goals, security and making things official. You might meet someone special through work or at an industry event.

September 18: Venus-Uranus trine

An attraction fires up unexpectedly, and you feel confident enough to act on it. Make your move! Couples can revolutionize a relationship by doing something spontaneous, possibly a little dramatic. Just keep it in the “healthy drama” zone.

September 20: Virgo new moon

A burst of clarity helps define your priorities as the new moon in your tenth house spotlights long-term goals. Are you ready for a big step or commitment?

Challenge Days:

September 28: Jupiter-Uranus opposition

High dramaalert! You or someone else could try to shake things up by creating conflict or declaring a need for more freedom. An outside attraction, a friends-with-benefits hookup or an online flirtation could overturn things, creating a messy situation. This is the second of this year’s two destabilizing Jupiter-Uranus face-offs, which can pave a bumpy road to revolution in your love life. If you’re craving autonomy and independence, see if you can’t create that without also turning your world upside-down.

MONEY & CAREER:

To the top! The Sun is blazing a trail through Virgo and your ambitious tenth house, sounding the call for goal-setting and polished professionalism. For the first three weeks of the month, put your best fall footwear forward by refining your plans and refreshing your appearance. Invest in a few sleek and stylish pieces that are comfortable (free-spirited Archers hate anything restrictive!) but sophisticated enough to put you in total #boss mode. This is THE fall to really lean in, Archer. Taskmaster Saturn is wrapping up the last part of its almost-three-year trek through Sagittarius, an extreme makeover that only happens every 29 years. Saturn is here until December 19, helping you set your visionary ideas on a solid structure. After all, you want brilliance that’s built to last!

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Joining the Sun in this same career-focused sector is meticulous Mercury (September 10 to 30) and motivator Mars (September 5 to October 22), helping you prioritize and attract high-profile opportunities. Connect with seasoned industry veterans who can provide advice and open doors. How you’ll woo them is up to you—but nobody is more compelling than an inspired Sag on fire! The September 20 Virgo new moon marks a powerful day for job interviews, pitch meetings and redefining your professional path. Spend time mapping out your goals and intentions, and thinking about what you’d like to accomplish by the end of this year.

Once the Sun blasts into Libra and your eleventh house of group activity on September 22, you’ll be armed with a solid action plan and ready to pitch your ideas. Networking is favored during this collaborative solar spell, so work the rooms, Sag. A technology-based venture could also go viral. Bring on the blogs, podcasts and email blasts!

Friction around your finances are likely to begin to clear up on September 28, when powermonger Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in your second house of work and money. Caveat: Tempers could flare that same day, when a tense opposition between Jupiter, your planetary guardian, and unpredictable Uranus inflates egos and ignites a competitive streak. Think before you speak, Sag. While it might feel good momentarily to put the other person in their place, you could create a lot more drama by doing so. Write that email to get it all off your chest, then press “Save to Draft” instead of “Send.” Chances are, after you unload and sleep on it, you’ll be able to write something more tempered in a day or two.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Opportunity Days:

September 9: Sun-Pluto trine

You’ve got the charisma, magnetism and clout to sway decision makers or hit a career home run. If you’re in a position of power, use your influence to greenlight a change-making initiative or donate money to a transformational cause.

September 10-30: Mercury in Virgo

Roll up your sleeves: You’re on a mission to map out a master plan and get the job done as Mercury returns for a second visit to your career house this year (retrograde-free!). Cut through the fluff and get to the point. Where can YOU take responsibility and get into action now? Prioritize, say no to distractions and focus on your biggest mission!



September 20: Virgo new moon

The year’s only new moon in your career house gives you a giant push onto your path. Plant the seeds for a brand-new professional chapter. You could be tapped for a promotion, leadership post or a role as an expert in your field.

September 28: Pluto retrograde ends

Shadowy Pluto ends a five-month retrograde slowdown in your work and money sector. You’ve processed old scarcity fears and searched your soul for a reason to get up in the morning, and now it’s time to get down to business—from a very authentic place.

September 30-October 17: Mercury in Libra

Great minds may not always think alike, but together they CAN change the world. While mental Mercury visits your teamwork and technology zone, you could make huge strides with a collective effort or an online campaign.

Challenge Days:

September 5: Sun-Neptune opposition

Welcome to distraction central! You want to get things done, but you keep getting pulled into SOS calls from loved ones or distracted by your own emotions. Balancing demands from work and home can prove an epic challenge today.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

September 14: Sun-Saturn square

You’ve got big ideas and lofty visions, but are you ready for prime time? Your self-doubt could (mistakenly) convince you that you’re not qualified to lead. As the famous quote goes: If not you, who? That said, you may need to put a stronger infrastructure in place before you execute or launch. Make sure you’ve considered every possible thing that can go wrong—especially if you have to pitch this to skeptical or conservative decision makers. (Warning: They won’t throw you any free passes today.) If your foundation isn’t rock-solid, get that in place first. You may need more training or credentials to be ready for a position, too. Don’t get discouraged; get busy!

September 24: Mars-Neptune opposition

Intensifying Mars in your career sector is at odds with foggy Neptune in your home and family zone. You could struggle to balance it all or feel guilty about not spending enough quality time with your peeps as you race against the clock. If work has you stressed to the max, take a time-out for self-care.

Love Days: 8, 12

Money Days: 20, 28

Luck Days: 16, 26

Off Days: 10, 14, 23

See All Signs