Toronto is home to a host of natural settings that make it easy to escape city life without actually stepping outside of its limits. Lucky for us, because when living and working in the the city, it's hard not to feel out of touch with nature at times. These places are the perfect antidote to a case of the concrete blues.

Here are my picks for where to go to escape the city without leaving Toronto.

Crothers' Woods

Crothers' Woods is an easily accessible reserve of green space nestled in the Don River area. Still unknown to many Torontonians, Crothers' Woods is a hidden gem where mountain bikers, joggers, picnickers and wanderers can revel in 52 hectares of mature maple-beech-oak woodland.

Rouge Park

Rouge Park sprawls across 40 square kilometres of adventure-worthy nature (making it Toronto's largest park and 13 times bigger than Central Park in NYC). Here you can walk, jog, set up camp, fish or chill out on a sandy beach. There's also overnight camping for a weekend escape.

Leslie Street Spit

The Leslie Street Spit -- officially named the Outer Harbour East Headland -- is a human-made extension of Leslie Street that juts out five kilometers into the waters of Lake Ontario. Although it was fabricated, the space has evolved into a haven for animal and plant life, housing over 300 species of birds and 400 species of plants, including stands of cottonwood and poplar trees.

David A. Balfour Park

It's easy to forget the city while exploring this ravine-based park, through which a walking trail weaves, following a ravine that eventually leads to the Evergreen Brick Works via Moore Park Ravine. There's also a kids playground, pretty fountains, a gated garden and a picnic site, making this a dreamy space for cyclists, joggers, families and romantics alike.

Ward's Island Beach

This beach is the perfect excuse to take the ferry out to the islands. It doesn't have a terrible track record when it comes to water cleanliness and safety, so chances are you can actually take a dip during when the lake warms up. There are many beaches on the Islands, but Ward's is often the quietest (particularly if you go during the week).

Sunnybrook Park

Formerly a 62-hectare farm property, Sunnybrook Park is steeped in equestrian heritage -- it even houses the Sunnybrook Stables and hosts cricket matches. With many bike and hiking trails, it's a quiet space to let off steam, and, being located just south of the Bridle Path area, it's also an ideal place to dress your best and pretend you're a one-percenter.

South Humber Park

Wildlife lovers, you've just found your Cloud Nine: nestled in the west end of Toronto, South Humber Park boasts a marsh that's home to a ton of birds like hawks, great blue herons and swans. Following a paved trail that leads north, you can also make your way to a lush forest that's worth exploring. Want to keeping going? The entire Humber Valley is beautiful.

Allan Gardens Conservatory

It may be a tourist hotspot, but Allan Gardens Conservatory is still a serene place to spend an afternoon. It's free, it's right in the heart of the city, and it's beautiful inside and out: enjoy the cast-iron and glass architecture before stepping inside to gawk at the botanical wonderland's collection of exotic plants and seasonal flower shows.



Glen Stewart Ravine

After a recent $1-million revamp, the Glen Stewart Ravine in the Beaches is a favourite amongst Toronto's nature lovers. An elevated path leads visitors through the 11-hectare area, making it a lot easier for visitors in wheelchairs (or visitors with rowdy kids) to explore the ravine and its red oak and red maple forest.

Cherry Beach

Hidden in the middle of the super-industrial Port Lands area is Cherry Beach, which is so naturally beautiful it almost seems like the Toronto skyline is out of place in the background. It's a huge spot for sports like windsurfing, kitesurfing and swimming, and with its barbecue-friendly zone and off-leash area for dog walkers, Cherry Beach feels miles away from urban life.

What did I miss? Add your suggestions in the comments.

Photo of the Leslie Street Spit by James Gonneau