The Dalai Lama, his holiness is a world leader that is committed to promoting positive values such as , forgiveness,self-discipline, tolerance, compassion and contentment. He is a spiritual leader like no other and is highlighting the importance of happiness and world peace every minute of the day.

The Dalai Lama’s quotes and sayings are spread throughout the world and are taken on board by many who wish to live a positive and fulfilled life.

We at Addicted2Success love the Dalai Lama’s inspirational messages so we decided to compile the Top 100 Dalai Lama quotes online for you to be inspired by and for you to share with anyone else you believe will love his message.

Here are his life changing quotes:

100 Dalai Lama Quotes That Will Change Your Life

1. “Give the ones you love wings to fly, roots to come back and reasons to stay.” – Dalai Lama

2. “Time passes unhindered. When we make mistakes, we cannot turn the clock back and try again. All we can do is use the present well.” – Dalai Lama

3. “An open heart is an open mind.” – Dalai Lama

4. “We can never obtain peace in the outer world until we make peace with ourselves” – Dalai Lama

5. “The goal is not to be better than the other man, but your previous self.” – Dalai Lama

6. “An eye for an eye….we are all blind” – Dalai Lama

7. “A spoon cannot taste of the food it carries. Likewise, a foolish man cannot understand the wise man´s wisdom even if he associates with a sage.” – Dalai Lama

8. “There is a saying in Tibetan, ‘Tragedy should be utilized as a source of strength.’

No matter what sort of difficulties, how painful experience is, if we lose our hope, that’s our real disaster.” ― Dalai Lama

9. “Remember that the best relationship is one in which your love for each other exceeds your need for each other.” ― Dalai Lama

10. “Every day, think as you wake up, today I am fortunate to be alive, I have a precious human life, I am not going to waste it. I am going to use all my energies to develop myself, to expand my heart out to others; to achieve enlightenment for the benefit of all beings. I am going to have kind thoughts towards others, I am not going to get angry or think badly about others. I am going to benefit others as much as I can.” ― Dalai Lama

11. “The roots of all goodness lie in the soil of appreciation.” – The Dalai Lama

12. “Silence is sometimes the best answer” ― Dalai Lama

13. “The true hero is one who conquers his own anger and hatred.” – Dalai Lama

14. “In our struggle for freedom, truth is the only weapon we possess.” – Dalai Lama

15. “Know the rules well, so you can break them effectively.” ― Dalai Lama

16. “Love and compassion are necessities, not luxuries. Without them, humanity cannot survive.” ― Dalai Lama

17. “Choose to be optimistic, it feels better.” ― Dalai Lama

18. “To remain indifferent to the challenges we face is indefensible. If the goal is noble, whether or not it is realized within our lifetime is largely irrelevant. What we must do therefore is to strive and persevere and never give up.” – Dalai Lama

19. “Our prime purpose in this life is to help others. And if you can’t help them, at least don’t hurt them.” ― Dalai Lama

20. “If a problem is fixable, if a situation is such that you can do something about it, then there is no need to worry. If it’s not fixable, then there is no help in worrying. There is no benefit in worrying whatsoever.” ― Dalai Lama

21. “The ultimate source of happiness is not money and power, but warm-heartedness” – Dalai Lama

22. “This is my simple religion. No need for temples. No need for complicated philosophy. Your own mind, your own heart is the temple. Your philosophy is simple kindness.” ― Dalai Lama

23. “Judge your success by what you had to give up in order to get it.” ― Dalai Lama

24. “It is very rare or almost impossible that an event can be negative from all points of view.” – Dalai Lama

25th Dalai Lama Quote – “As you breathe in, cherish yourself. As you breathe out, cherish all Beings.” – The Dalai Lama

26. “People take different roads seeking fulfillment and happiness. Just because they’re not on your road doesn’t mean they’ve gotten lost.” ― Dalai Lama

27. “The whole purpose of religion is to facilitate love and compassion, patience, tolerance, humility, and forgiveness.” ― Dalai Lama

28. “If you can cultivate the right attitude, your enemies are your best spiritual teachers because their presence provides you with the opportunity to enhance and develop tolerance, patience and understanding.” ― Dalai Lama

29. “One great question underlies our experience, whether we think about it or not: what is the purpose of life? . . . From the moment of birth every human being wants happiness and does not want suffering. Neither social conditioning nor education nor ideology affects this. From the very core of our being, we simply desire contentment. . . Therefore, it is important to discover what will bring about the greatest degree of happiness.” – Dalai Lama

30. “Only the development of compassion and understanding for others can bring us the tranquility and happiness we all seek.” ― Dalai Lama

31. “Take into account that great love and great achievements involve great risk.” ― Dalai Lama

32. “Look at children. Of course they may quarrel, but generally speaking they do not harbor ill feelings as much or as long as adults do. Most adults have the advantage of education over children, but what is the use of an education if they show a big smile while hiding negative feelings deep inside? Children don’t usually act in such a manner. If they feel angry with someone, they express it, and then it is finished. They can still play with that person the following day.” ― Dalai Lama

33. “The ultimate authority must always rest with the individual’s own reason and critical analysis.” – Dalai Lama

34. “Given the scale of life in the cosmos, one human life is no more than a tiny blip. Each one of us is a just visitor to this planet, a guest, who will only stay for a limited time. What greater folly could there be than to spend this short time alone, unhappy or in conflict with our companions? Far better, surely, to use our short time here in living a meaningful life, enriched by our sense of connection with others and being of service to them.” – Dalai Lama XIV

35. “Share your knowledge. It is a way to achieve immortality.” – Dalai Lama

36. “When you realize you’ve made a mistake, take immediate steps to correct it.” ― Dalai Lama

37. “Let us try to recognize the precious nature of each day.” – Dalai Lama

38. “World peace must develop from inner peace. Peace is not just mere absence of violence. Peace is, I think, the manifestation of human compassion.” ― Dalai Lama

39. “All suffering is caused by ignorance. People inflict pain on others in the selfish pursuit of their own happiness or satisfaction” ― Dalai Lama

40. “Compassion is not religious business, it is human business, it is not luxury, it is essential for our own peace and mental stability, it is essential for human survival.” – Dalai Lama

41. “The purpose of all the major religious traditions is not to construct big temples on the outside, but to create temples of goodness and compassion inside, in our hearts.” ― Dalai Lama

42. “One problem with our current society is that we have an attitude towards education as if it is there to simply make you more clever, make you more ingenious… Even though our society does not emphasize this, the most important use of knowledge and education is to help us understand the importance of engaging in more wholesome actions and bringing about discipline within our minds. The proper utilization of our intelligence and knowledge is to effect changes from within to develop a good heart.” – Dalai Lama

43. “The creatures that inhabit this earth-be they human beings or animals-are here to contribute, each in its own particular way, to the beauty and prosperity of the world.” – Dalai Lama

44. “Happiness is not something ready made. It comes from your own actions.” ― Dalai Lama

45. “A truly compassionate attitude toward others does not change even if they behave negatively or hurt you.” ― Dalai Lama

46. “I don’t know whether the universe, with its countless galaxies, stars and planets, has a deeper meaning or not, but at the very least, it is clear that we humans who live on this earth face the task of making a happy life for ourselves. Therefore, it is important to discover what will bring about the greatest degree of happiness.” – Dalai Lama

47. “The more you are motivated by Love, The more Fearless & Free your action will be.” ― Dalai Lama

48. “Human potential is the same for all. Your feeling, “I am of no value”, is wrong. Absolutely wrong. You are deceiving yourself. We all have the power of thought – so what are you lacking? If you have willpower, then you can change anything. It is usually said that you are your own master.” ― Dalai Lama

49. “Neither a space station nor an enlightened mind can be realized in a day.” – Dalai Lama

50th Dalai Lama Quote – “Old friends pass away, new friends appear. It is just like the days. An old day passes, a new day arrives. The important thing is to make it meaningful: a meaningful friend – or a meaningful day.” ― Dalai Lama

51. “Hard times build determination and inner strength. Through them we can also come to appreciate the uselessness of anger. Instead of getting angry nurture a deep caring and respect for troublemakers because by creating such trying circumstances they provide us with invaluable opportunities to practice tolerance and patience.” ― Dalai Lama

52. “Be kind whenever possible. It is always possible.” ― Dalai Lama

53. “To conquer oneself is a greater victory than to conquer thousands in a battle.” – Dalai Lama

54. “A good friend who points out mistakes and imperfections and rebukes evil is to be respected as if he reveals the secret of some hidden treasure.” ― Dalai Lama

55. “I will not propose to you that my way is best. The decision is up to you. If you find some point which may be suitable to you, then you can carry out experiments for yourself. If you find that it is of no use, then you can discard it.” – Dalai Lama

56. “The way to change others’ minds is with affection, and not anger.” ― Dalai Lama

57. “If you have fear of some pain or suffering, you should examine whether there is anything you can do about it. If you can, there is no need to worry about it; if you cannot do anything, then there is also no need to worry.” ― Dalai Lama

58. “Instead of wondering WHY this is happening to you, consider why this is happening to YOU.” – Dalai Lama XIV

59. “A disciplined mind leads to happiness, and an undisciplined mind leads to suffering.” – The Dalai Lama

60. “In the practice of tolerance, one’s enemy is the best teacher.” ― Dalai Lama

61. “Because we all share this planet earth, we have to learn to live in harmony and peace with each other and with nature. This is not just a dream, but a necessity.” ― Dalai Lama

62. “Anger or hatred is like a fisherman’s hook. It is very important for us to ensure that we are not caught by it.” – Dalai Lama

63. “Irrespective of whether we are believers or agnostics, whether we believe in God or karma, moral ethics is a code which everyone is able to pursue.” ― Dalai Lama

64. “Happiness doesn’t always come from a pursuit. Sometimes it comes when we least expect it.” – Dalai Lama

65. “When we are motivated by compassion and wisdom, the results of our actions benefit everyone, not just our individual selves or some immediate convenience. When we are able to recognize and forgive ignorant actions of the past, we gain strength to constructively solve the problems of the present.” ― Dalai Lama

66. “I believe the very purpose of our life is to seek happiness. Whether one believes in religion or not, whether one believes in that religion or this religion, we are all seeking something better in life. So, I think, the very motion of our life is towards happiness. – Dalai Lama

67. “Compassion is the radicalism of our time.” ― Dalai Lama

68. “If someone has a gun and is trying to kill you, it would be reasonable to shoot back with your own gun.” ― Dalai Lama

69. “Peace does not mean an absence of conflicts; differences will always be there. Peace means solving these differences through peaceful means; through dialogue, education, knowledge; and through humane ways.” ― Dalai Lama

70. “We need to learn how to want what we have NOT to have what we want in order to get steady and stable Happiness” – Dalai Lama

71. “Through violence, you may ‘solve’ one problem, but you sow the seeds for another.” – Dalai Lama

72. “Where ignorance is our master, there is no possibility of real peace.” – Dalai Lama

73. “Inner peace is the key: if you have inner peace, the external problems do not affect your deep sense of peace and tranquility…without this inner peace, no matter how comfortable your life is materially, you may still be worried, disturbed, or unhappy because of circumstances.” ― Dalai Lama

74. “You must not hate those who do wrong or harmful things; but with compassion, you must do what you can to stop them — for they are harming themselves, as well as those who suffer from their actions.” – Dalai Lama

75th Dalai Lama Quote – “Those who have little interest in spirituality shouldn’t think that human inner values don’t apply to you. The inner peace of an alert and calm mind are the source of real happiness and good health. Our human intelligence tells us which of our emotions are positive and helpful and which are damaging and to be restrained or avoided.” – Dalai Lama

76. “Anger is the ultimate destroyer of your own peace of mind” – Dalai Lama

77. “There is only one important point you must keep in your mind and let it be your guide. No matter what people call you, you are just who you are. Keep to this truth. You must ask yourself how is it you want to live your life. We live and we die, this is the truth that we can only face alone. No one can help us, not even the Buddha. So consider carefully, what prevents you from living the way you want to live your life?” ― Dalai Lama

78. “Compassion naturally creates a positive atmosphere, and as a result you feel peaceful and content.” – Dalai Lama XIV

79. “Remember that sometimes not getting what you want is a wonderful stroke of luck.” ― Dalai Lama

80. “If you think you are too small to make a difference, try sleeping with a mosquito.” ― Dalai Lama

81. “Love is the absence of judgment.” ― Dalai Lama

82. “It is under the greatest adversity that there exists the greatest potential for doing good, both for oneself and others.” ― Dalai Lama

83. “I defeat my enemies when I make them my friends.” ― Dalai Lama

84. “Our ancient experience confirms at every point that everything is linked together, everything is inseparable.” ― Dalai Lama

85. “What surprises me most is “Man”, because he sacrifices his health in order to make money. Then he sacrifices money to recuperate his health. And then he is so anxious about the future that he doesn’t enjoy the present; The result being he doesn’t live in the present or the future; He lives as if he’s never going to die, and then he dies having never really lived.” – Dalai Lama

86. “Love and Compassion are the true religions to me. But to develop this, we do not need to believe in any religion.” ― Dalai Lama

87. “Someone else’s action should not determine your response.” – Dalai Lama

88. “When we meet real tragedy in life, we can react in two ways–either by losing hope and falling into self-destructive habits, or by using the challenge to find our inner strength.” ― Dalai Lama

89. “Cultivating a close, warmhearted feeling for others automatically puts the mind at ease. It helps remove whatever fears or insecurities we may have and gives us the strength to cope with any obstacles we encounter. It is the principal source of success in life. Since we are not solely material creatures, it is a mistake to place all our hopes for happiness on external development alone. The key is to develop inner peace.” – Dalai Lama

90. “I believe compassion to be one of the few things we can practice that will bring immediate and long-term happiness to our lives. I’m not talking about the short-term gratification of pleasures like sex, drugs or gambling (though I’m not knocking them), but something that will bring true and lasting happiness. The kind that sticks.” ― Dalai Lama

91. “My religion is very simple. My religion is kindness.” ― Dalai Lama

92. “As people alive today, we must consider future generations: a clean environment is a human right like any other. It is therefore part of our responsibility toward others to ensure that the world we pass on is as healthy, if not healthier, than we found it.” – Dalai Lama

93. “We begin from the recognition that all beings cherish happiness and do not want suffering. It then becomes both morally wrong and pragmatically unwise to pursue only one’s own happiness oblivious to the feelings and aspirations of all others who surround us as members of the same human family. The wiser course is to think of others when pursuing our own happiness.” – Dalai Lama

94. “The topic of compassion is not at all religious business; it is important to know it is human business, it is a question of human survival.” – Dalai Lama

95. “Whether one is rich or poor, educated or illiterate, religious or non-believing, man or woman, black, white, or brown, we are all the same. Physically, emotionally, and mentally, we are all equal. We all share basic needs for food, shelter, safety, and love. We all aspire to happiness and we all shun suffering. Each of us has hopes, worries, fears, and dreams. Each of us wants the best for our family and loved ones. We all experience pain when we suffer loss and joy when we achieve what we seek. On this fundamental level, religion, ethnicity, culture, and language make no difference.” – Dalai Lama

96. “If you want others to be happy, practice compassion. If you want to be happy, practice compassion.” ― Dalai Lama

97. “Sometimes one creates a dynamic impression by saying something, and sometimes one creates as significant an impression by remaining silent.” – Dalai Lama

98. “Although you may not always be able to avoid difficult situations,you can modify the extent to which you can suffer by how you choose to respond to the situation.” – Dalai Lama

99. “We can live without religion and meditation, but we cannot survive without human affection.” ― Dalai Lama

100th Dalai Lama Quote “When we feel love and kindness toward others, it not only makes others feel loved and cared for, but it helps us also to develop inner happiness and peace.” – Dalai Lama

I hope you enjoyed this amazing collection of Dalai Lama quotes. To add to the value I have decided to share a funny clip of The Dalai Lama below.

The Dalai Lama is Told a Joke – This is funny

What’s your favorite Dalai Lama Quote? Please share your quotes in the comment section below.