Courtesy of the Company

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

1. When in doubt: a white oxford shirt.

2. That being said, it wouldn't kill you to mix things up every once in a while. Pinstripe shirts are good. Windowpane, too.

3. Blue gingham. Trust us.

4. The closest a man should ever come to touching denim shorts is helping a woman out of them.

5. There is a name for men who can pull off wearing sports jerseys. They're called professional athletes.

6. "I'm on vacation" has never been a good excuse for anything, including doing body shots, ignoring intelligence warnings about possible terrorist attacks, and wearing whatever you damn well please.

Most Popular

7. A rugby shirt is the most masculine thing a man can wear.

8. The 1950s and '60s were the high points of casual. Everything before and after was hit-or-miss.

9. Fitted is good. Snug is dicey. Tight is just wrong.

10. Hemp clothes are great. If you want to smoke them.

11. Khaki pants will look and feel their best approximately two weeks before disintegrating.

12. The man who imparts opinions via T-shirt has neither the intelligence to form a cogent opinion nor the good sense to keep it to himself.

13. Small holes in jeans? Kind of cool. Small holes in sweaters? Pathetic.

14. Justin Timberlake doesn't look quite as good as he thinks he does.

15. When purchasing jeans, leave the acid, stone, and other artificial washes to the good people of Eastern Europe. The best way to break in a pair of jeans is to wear them as often as you can.

16. The shinier the shine or the pointier the point, the less casual the shoe.

17. A discreet paint or grass stain conveys a sense of lived-in comfort. The same cannot be said for stains from food, dirt, wine, or bodily fluids. That's just gross.

18. Denim is the center of the casual universe. And some things look better with it than others. A quick primer:

All the Time: Cotton button-down or T-shirt, brown loafers, navy-blue blazer, cashmere sweater.

Most of the Time: Crewneck sweatshirt, black loafers, tweed jacket, cotton turtleneck, white sneakers.

Only Sometimes: Hooded sweatshirt, high-top sneakers, sports jersey.

Only Under Duress: Waistcoat, silk shirt, flip-flops, necktie.

Only Under Penalty of Death: Cufflinks, suspenders, opera cape.

19. Everything looks better with age. Except for white T-shirts. Those look best new.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

20. The Professor was the best-dressed man on Gilligan's Island, followed by Gilligan, Thurston Howell III, and the Skipper. Oh, and for what it's worth, Ginger. By God, Ginger.

21. There is nothing so wrong with one's appearance that can't be improved, however slightly, by tucking in one's shirt and standing up straight.

22. Always tuck: polo and dress shirts that hang below your hip. Never tuck: sweaters and turtlenecks. Everything else is negotiable.

23. Articles of clothing that you can dress up: polo shirts, khaki shorts, blue jeans, white sneakers, and, for Texans, cowboy hats and boots.

24. Articles that you can never dress up: sports jerseys, track pants, wifebeaters, Birkenstocks, and flip-flops.

25. The only ribbed items a man should wear are socks and condoms, and he best not confuse the two.

26. A $40 pair of jeans can fit you just as well and look just as good as a $200 pair. They'll just take a whole lot longer for you to find.

27. Cotton is the universal language of casual clothing. Wear it anywhere and you'll fit right in.

28. Sweatpants are for sick days, couch surfing, and light exercise. For anything else, throw on a pair of jeans and get on with it.

29. Athletes inspire the best sneakers.

30. Velour: no.

31. Never wear more than two denim items at a time. Scratch that: Never wear more than one denim item at a time, and make sure it's not a vest.

32. Michael Bastian. Tim Hamilton. Adam Kimmel. Learn these names, for they are the future of American men's wear.

33. To our knowledge, tank drivers never wore tank tops. If they did, we might like them better.

34. Khaki is a color. Chinos are a pair of pants. Know the difference but feel free to use the terms interchangeably.

35. Any man who plays contact sports while wearing a watch he values — formal, sport, or diving — deserves exactly what's coming to him.

36. Leather watch straps.

37. The more expensive a restaurant's entrées, the less comfortable you will feel in jeans. Unless, of course, you could buy the restaurant, in which case you can get away with anything you want.

38. Tennis and baseball are the most influential sports on American style. Discuss.