Before the 1960 presidential debates, Kennedy and Nixon both declined the services of a makeup artist . This didn't impact JFK, because he had the bronzed skin of a Greek god. But Nixon was coming off of a long flu and a bout of infection; he looked like Death after a fistfight with Pestilence. His ghastly appearance may have cost him the debate, and therefore the Presidency. Ever since, politicians have relied on makeup artists to hide their late nights, cold sores, and reptilian skin from public view. We talked to three of these artists: Natalie Hayes, Stacey Frasca, and Leah Greene. They told us ...

7 You Get Shockingly Close To The Most Powerful People On Earth You Get Shockingly Close To The Most Powerful People On Earth

Natalie did Jimmy Carter's makeup once. He wasn't president at the time or in the middle of building a house for homeless people out of bones he'd personally removed from Goldman Sachs bankers. He was just being interviewed for a documentary. But he still had a Secret Service detail.

"You get background checked. There were three occasions I was supposed to do Jimmy Carter's makeup. Every time I had to submit to a complete criminal background check."

But, Natalie was surprised to see that "when I actually went, no one went through my kit at all. And I thought, wow, if I were ..." she trailed off at that point, but then noted, "I would have had complete access to this person. They even left the president and I alone at the room."

Leah reported a similar experience with George W. Bush, back when he actually was the Republican nominee for president, though not quite yet president. She also received a background check, but said that the Secret Service didn't check her assortment of powders, although "they did search the bag."

She worked on Bush twice. The first time was in a hotel room full of his people, but the second time was on his campaign bus:

"I guess it was his campaign manager, she left the bus, and I did think it was a little odd she left me alone with him. That was the second time I did his makeup, so maybe they trusted me more ... I just kinda remember thinking, I'm all alone with this man?"

Stacey has also done some very high-profile makeup jobs, including for Jeb Bush and Elizabeth Warren. She pointed out that the only time her powders have actually been checked is when she was working on some big-shot bankers:

"In Boston I had to go to the federal reserve building and I was doing makeup for one of their very important clients, and there was a lot of new banking that was going to be announced worldwide ... your license is being copied, I'm going through a scanner, my makeup products are going through a scanner ..."

We're not suggesting that nefarious evildoers train up a cadre of unstoppable cosmeticians, complete with poisonous foundation, but if the folks writing the next Bond movie are hurting for ideas, well, there's a freebie.