These Beauty Brands Are Still Tested on Animals

You may have assumed that most major cosmetics companies were on board with alternatives to cruelty to animals, but there are some that still pay to poison and kill. It isn’t always easy to know which brands are completely cruelty-free. For instance, L’Oréal, which doesn’t test on animals in the United States, pays for deadly testing in China, where archaic and painful experiments on animals are required for cosmetics.

But there’s good news: We have more than 2,500 compassionate brands in our cruelty-free company database, which is a positive sign that times are changing! We encourage you to bookmark this link and use it anytime you’re curious about whether a company is cruel or kind.

Here are some of the top cosmetics brands whose products are still tested on animals—and some cruelty-free brands that you should support instead:

1. Avon

Remember the “Avon lady” who sold makeup door to door? Well, we think that sounds about as old-fashioned as the idea of testing cosmetics on animals. If you were using Avon’s eyeliner, try Jordana Cosmetics Fabuliner Bold Felt-Tip Liquid Eyeliner.

2. Benefit

Benefit markets its brand by using innocent 1950s imagery and a lot of pink. We wish consumers could see that tests on animals are being conducted behind the scenes. If you were using Benefit’s blush, try Too Faced Sweethearts Blush instead.

3. Clinique

Animals don’t worry about wrinkles, and we shouldn’t poison and kill them for our night cream. If you were using Clinique’s eye cream, switch to tarte Maracuja C-Brighter Eye Treatment.

4. CoverGirl

No product that has been tested on animals could possibly be considered easy, breezy, or beautiful! CoverGirl pays for cruel tests on animals in order to sell its products in China. If you were using its pressed powder, try Physicians Formula Super BB All-in-1 Beauty Balm Powder instead.

5. Estée Lauder

Estée Lauder is the parent company of many subsidiaries. And while Smashbox and Aveda are both cruelty-free, others that it owns aren’t—including its namesake brand, as well as Clinique, Bobbi Brown, Bumble and bumble, La Mer, and Origins, among others. If you were using any of these cruel brands’ concealers, try the NYX Cosmetics HD Photogenic Concealer Wand instead.

6. L’Oréal

Did you know that L’Oréal owns Kiehl’s, Maybelline, Lancôme, and many more cosmetics companies? Many pay for tests on animals in China, but Pureology, The Body Shop, and NYX Cosmetics have all stuck to their compassionate principles by refusing to sell their products in that country until it accepts alternatives to cruel animal tests. If you were using L’Oréal’s liquid foundation, try Milani Cosmetics Glow Natural Brush-On Liquid Makeup.

7. Makeup Forever

Many people started buying Makeup Forever because it carries theatrical-quality makeup, which can look brighter and be longer lasting. Nowadays, high-pigment makeup isn’t hard to come by, and you can choose from many compassionate options. If you were using Makeup Forever’s eye shadow, try Obsessive Compulsive Cosmetics Loose Colour Concentrates.

8. Maybelline

We definitely think that you were born with it and don’t need Maybelline’s cruelly produced items to feel pretty. If you were using its mascara, try wet n wild MegaVolume Mascara instead.

9. OPI

OPI is owned by Coty, Inc., and was removed from our cruelty-free list when we discovered that it had abandoned its cruelty-free policy and was selling in China. If you were using its polish, make the bunnies happy and try Pacifica 7 Free Nail Polish instead.

10. Phyto

Gee, I’ve never met a rabbit who was concerned about the volume of her hair. Tragically, Phyto still pays the Chinese government to test its products on helpless animals. If you were using its conditioner, switch to Avalon Organics Volumizing Rosemary Conditioner.

11. Elizabeth Arden

It’s a shame that Elizabeth Arden, which is owned by Revlon, still pays for tests on animals to sell its products in China. If you were using its lipstick, try Urban Decay Naked Ultra Nourishing Lipgloss instead.

12. Victoria’s Secret

After years of upholding its policy never to test on animals, the company has let down compassionate consumers everywhere by choosing profits over principles. Victoria’s Secret expanded sales to China and began paying for cruel and deadly tests on animals in order to sell its products there.

Please sign our action alert and tell Victoria’s Secret that cruelty isn’t sexy and that you won’t buy its products until the company is 100 percent cruelty-free again.

If you were using the company’s body spray, try Early-Harvest Raspberry Eau de Toilette by The Body Shop instead.

Warning: Don’t be fooled by claims on a label that state that a product wasn’t tested on animals. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration doesn’t regulate “cruelty-free” or “not tested on animals” packaging labels, so companies can put this on their packaging even if the product or ingredients have been tested on animals. To find out whether a product is truly cruelty-free, use PETA’s trusted list of certified companies that don’t test on animals.

To learn more, watch this powerful video about animal testing: