22 Ways To Get Your Vegan Snack Attack On

It must be snacking season because I’ve had a lot of emails lately asking for some healthy vegan snack ideas and I thought it was a great idea for a post. Many of the recipes below are also some of the most popular snack recipes of 2011, so I will also add this post to my Top Recipes of 2011 page for easy reference.

Ready to get your vegan snack attack on?

My all-time favourite cracker and quite possibly one of the top 3 recipes so far in 2012. Endurance Crackers are extremely light and crispy while providing long-lasting energy. They are also vegan, gluten-free, soy-free, nut-free, sugar-free, and oil-free to boot. Feel free to change up the seasonings and spices as you wish (see the comments in the original post for some ideas) and serve with protein-packed hummus for a snack that will fuel you for the long haul. Man, I wish I had some right now!

Enjoy this ultra-creamy, thick, and energizing smoothie, with a hint of orange that will help keep those cold bugs at bay!

Love dipping your finger into a bowl of cake batter? I hear ya. Now the cake batter flavour we know and love is in smoothie form so you can slurp away to your hearts content.

Just like my favourite salt and vinegar chips, but better. Enjoy these protein-packed, crispy chickpeas without any processed ingredients and a fraction of the fat.

Incredibly easy to make. Minimal ingredients. Best of all, they’re even better than the store bought version.

Growing up, I always loved strawberry nutri-grain bars. These are similar in taste, but with all natural ingredients and much less sugar.

Adapted from the lovely Heather, this almond butter is the best thing to pair with a juicy apple or drizzled over fruit. Or just spoon it straight from the jar…you’ll see what I mean.

This is the homemade hummus that convinced me I can make a hummus as good as my favourite brands in the grocery store.

I’ve always loved granola, but I rarely buy it because it tends to have as much sugar in it as many decadent desserts. This is my lightened-up version with the least amount of sweetener necessary while still tasting like granola should.

Packed with chia seeds, dried cranberries, pistachios, and lemon, these bars are chewy, light, and tropical. I like to think of them as a tropical macaroon bar. They also make a perfect breakfast when you are running out the door!

These Almond Butter Rice Crisp Treats are a gourmet version (read: no bake) of my beloved childhood rice crispie squares. Unlike the original, this recipe is made without marshmallows, but I promise you won’t miss them!

for the rest click the link to continue…

Simple. Delicious. Addictive. 8 grams of protein per bar. Meet the protein bars that carried us through miles and miles of walking throughout NYC! I added protein powder to rev up the protein in these bars, making sure they would give me lasting energy when out and about. I wasn’t really sure what they would taste like with 1/2 cup of protein powder, but I was pleasantly surprised by the outcome! Just make sure you use a pleasant tasting protein powder and you’ll be fine. I used an unsweetened rice protein powder (Garden of Life) which worked great as it doesn’t have a strong flavour.

Like carrot cake, but healthier. My favourite way to enjoy these muffins is slathered with Earth Balance or crumbled on top of a bowl of vegan overnight oats. Perfecto!

This is what you get when you combine my cashew cheeze dip and my favourite hummus. Pure bliss in a bowl.

A dense loaf, but not in a bad way. Whole grain spelt flour tends to make dense breads, but I just love the nutty flavour of spelt so I don’t mind. The walnuts, streusel, and raisins add just the right amount of sweetness and crunch and the zucchini gives moisture without needing any oil. You also can’t taste the zucchini at all, but you can see the pretty green flecks!

Two pictures…just because I love it that much.

Thanks to the ripe bananas, there is minimal sweetener and oil required in this snack cake.

Prep time is just 3 minutes for these healthy frozen treats. It doesn’t get much quicker than that!

Amazing with corn chips, spread on a wrap, spooned on a salad, or enjoyed with a fork…

These Almond Butter Chews couldn’t be easier and they make a light pre-workout snack for about 100 calories each. They take 5 minutes to whip up, use just 1 bowl, and do not require an oven. You could even make them gluten-free. I use the Nature’s Path Rice Crisp cereal that is Gluten-Free.

I make this pudding when I want something indulgent tasting, but don’t feel like eating a ton of sugar. I love mixing carob powder and cocoa powder for a more complex chocolate flavour. The carob powder also adds a natural sweetness as an added bonus. If you don’t have carob, I suggest using a bit more cocoa powder and sweetener since it will be less sweet without the carob. Serve cold or heated up!

A rich and indulgent banana split…now made healthier.

Last but not least, this is a recipe that I made over the weekend. It reminds me of blueberry pie, in chia seed pudding form.

Pretty isn’t it? You can enjoy this warm or chilled depending on your mood.

The crumbled Basic Oatmeal Square really took it over the top. It’s like an upside down blueberry pie.

Think of this oatmeal square as basic baked oatmeal that can be dressed up any way you like. Each large square contains a tablespoon of flax and a teaspoon of chia seeds as well as 7 grams of fibre and 6 grams of protein. Feel free to add in nuts, dried fruit, chocolate, and other mix-ins as you desire.

Don’t forget to check out my Top Recipes of 2011 round up, filled with the blog’s most popular entrees, salads, breakfasts, and soups of last year!

Let's get social! Follow Angela on Instagram (@ohsheglows + @theglowspot), Facebook, Twitter, Pinterest, Snapchat, and Google+

