The ultimate luxury in our opinion? A set of handmade pottery, complete with slight imperfections, for the everyday table. Here are our favorite ceramic dinnerware sets made by US and Canadian studios.

Above: When Michelin three-star chef Christopher Kostow of The Restaurant at Meadowood in St. Helena, California, was looking to create a line of dinnerware, he reached out to local Pope Valley artist and ceramicist Richard Carter. The two decided to collaborate, enlisting the help of potter Eric VanderMolen and Remodelista editor at large Sarah Lonsdale, to create the Carter Kostow line. The collection includes a small, medium, and large plate, a bowl, and a small and large cup, starting at $25. All the pieces are available at March in San Francisco.

Above: Under the helm of artist Dora De Larios, LA’s Irving Place Studio–founded in the 1950s and revived in 2012 by De Larios and her daughter, Sabrina–offers ceramic dinner and serving pieces in different sizes and shapes. A Small Plate is $55, and a Dinner Plate is $70. To learn more about Irving Place Studio, see Ceramics that Once Lived in the White House.

Above: Designer Clair Catillaz makes a variety of ceramic pieces at Clam Lab, her Brooklyn studio. See more in our post Ceramics Inspired by 20th-Century Dishware, and go to Clam Lab to inquire about pricing.

Above: West River Field Lab, an LA studio run by Japanese artist Nobuhito Nishigawara, offers two dinnerware options: Dinner Plates (shown here) and Deep Dishes, as well as bowls. The WRF Dinner Plate is $28 and the WRF Salad/Dessert Plate is $24 at Spartan Shop. See our post Currently Coveting Japanese-Style Tableware Made in LA for more of the WRF collection.

Above: Eric Bonnin hand-turns ceramic pieces in his studio in TriBeCa: see our post, A French Potter at the Wheel in New York. His Kam dinner collection includes plates, bowls, cups, and pitchers in three colors (white, black, and oatmeal). Shown here, a Dinner Plate in Oatmeal; $46 at Mociun. The collection is available at Mociun, Spartan Shop, and Steve Alan.

Above: William Reardon founded New York Stoneware in Brooklyn in 2013 with the goal of incorporating pottery into people’s everyday lives. “I’ve kept my dinner plate dimensions just smaller than the average,” he says, “so that they can be used for any meal or type of dish. The combination of the rolled rim and the three stamps reference an English pewter charger of my mother-in-law’s.” The Dinner Plate is $95 and companion Mug is $45.