Goal.com has a good alternative to Forza Football. In addition to delivering scores within seconds of the ball sneaking into a goal, the app has news on transfer rumors and commentaries on games in progress. There’s also league information and video content, and you can modify the app to easily monitor news about your favorite club.

Two words of caution: The app may not have the global coverage of Forza Football. Also, although the app for both iOS and Android devices, some users complain the most recent update is buggy.

If you want to see footage from matches on your device, as well as learn the gossip and news of the sport, the ESPN FC app is very good. The app shows video highlights from games in the Barclays Premier League, along with other major leagues worldwide. As with other apps, you can also tailor the FC app to show news about your favorite teams, including up-to-date scores.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The design is a little formal, and depending on where you are when you access it, some content is limited because of video licensing rules. On iOS, some users complain, the app has annoying pop-up ads. The app is free on iOS and Android.

If it’s just soccer in the United States that you are interested in, Major League Soccer has an official app, free on iOS and Android. While I include it here for its live streams of hundreds of out-of-market games and its real-time updates on scores and major news, it has a few significant failings.

First of all, many games are blacked out because of licensing restrictions with major TV carriers, so you might not get to see the team you really want to watch. Second, many reviewers complain about annoying ads. And the app’s news section did not cover the amazing success of the United States women’s team, which appears to be an odd omission.

For the more authentic fan experience of listening to the score on the radio, TuneIn Radio has you covered. This Internet radio streaming app is widely liked, and among its long list of radio stations streamed globally are soccer-related radio shows from big names like the BBC and more. The app is free on iOS and Android.

Finally, there are ways to play the game through apps on your phone. Dream League Soccer, free on iOS and Android, is my favorite because it mixes classic soccer manager strategy with 3-D action. It’s easy to learn though hard to master, which makes it lots of fun.

So let’s tally it all up now. References to football in this article: seven. References to soccer: 10. Editors rule, but only by a bit.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Quick Call

WifiMapper has been popular on iOS because of its ability to help find nearby wireless hot spots, which is useful for avoiding high data bills. Now the app has hit the Android platform. With this version, you can connect to your newly found wireless networks with a click and leave feedback for other users on the quality of the hot spots you’ve used. WifiMapper is free.