World, meet falafel. Falafel, meet your eaters.

This recipe really threw me for a loop! But after multiple rounds of testing, I believe it’s perfected and ready to be enjoyed by all of you.

I’ve made two other falafel recipes for the blog. First were my Better Than Restaurant Falafel, which still rank up there as one of my all-time favorite plant-based recipes! And last year I made these Baked Falafel Burgers, which are all kinds of hearty and delicious.

But I was still craving something a bit more traditional. And since I eat falafel so often at restaurants, I wanted a recipe I could make at home and really enjoy. I believe I’ve gotten as close as humanly possible without busting out the fryer – a feat I have yet to attempt.

These falafel are simple, requiring just 10 ingredients (give or take a spice), and come together in a blender or food processor.

They also sauté up beautifully in just 5 minutes! The only waiting period is 1-2 hours for chilling the dough (which is optional but recommended). Otherwise, these little gems come together with minimal effort and time.

What is a falafel without a good sauce? My 4-ingredient garlic-dill sauce is not to be missed. While your falafels are cooking, whip this up in just 5 minutes to elevate this dish to the next level of awesome. Trust me on this one – you’re gonna want that sauce.

I hope you all love this recipe! It’s:

Simple

Flavorful

Crispy on the outside

Tender on the inside

Garlicky

& Super satisfying

Who needs take-out when you can make perfectly delicious falafel at home? Serve these in a pita with tomato, onion, lettuce and my garlic-dill sauce and you’re seriously good to go. Hummus and vegetables make an excellent side dish. Otherwise, serve these atop a bed of greens for a lighter option.

If you make this recipe, let us know! Leave a comment and rate it, and don’t forget to tag a picture #minimalistbaker on Instagram so we can see. Cheers, friends!

4.7 from 58 reviews Easy Vegan Falafel Print Friendly Version Prep time 2 hours Cook time 10 mins Total time 2 hours 10 mins Easy, 10-ingredient falafel made with chickpeas and seasoned with parsley, cumin and garlic. A simple, flavorful, hearty plant-based meal. Author: Minimalist Baker Recipe type: Entrée Cuisine: Mediterranean-Inspired, Vegan, Gluten-Free Serves: 12 Ingredients 1 15-ounce (425 g) can chickpeas, rinsed, drained and patted dry

1/3 cup (15 g) chopped fresh parsley (or sub cilantro)

4 cloves garlic, minced

2 shallots, minced (~ 3/4 cup, 65 g | or sub white onion)

2 Tbsp (17 g) raw sesame seeds (or sub finely chopped nuts, such as pecans)

1 1/2 tsp cumin, plus more to taste

1/4 tsp each sea salt and black pepper, plus more to taste

optional: Healthy pinch each cardamom and coriander

3-4 Tbsp (24-31 g) all-purpose flour (or sub oat flour or gluten-free blend with varied results)

3-4 Tbsp (45 - 60 ml) grape seed oil for cooking (or sub any neutral oil with a high smoke point)

optional: Panko bread crumbs for coating (see instructions)

Garlic Dill Sauce for serving (found within the Mediterranean Baked Sweet Potato Recipe) Instructions Add chickpeas, parsley, shallot, garlic, sesame seeds, cumin, salt, pepper (and coriander and cardamom if using) to a food processor or blender and mix/pulse to combine, scraping down sides as needed until thoroughly combined. You’re looking for a crumbly dough, not a paste (see photo). Add flour 1 Tbsp at a time and pulse/mix to combine until no longer wet and you can mold the dough into a ball without it sticking to your hands - I used 4 Tbsp. Taste and adjust seasonings as needed. I added a bit more salt, pepper, and a dash of cardamom and coriander. You want the flavor to be pretty bold, so don’t be shy. Transfer to a mixing bowl, cover and refrigerate for 1-2 hours to firm up. If you’re in a hurry you can skip this step but they will be a little more fragile when cooking. Once chilled, scoop out rounded Tablespoon amounts (~30 g in weight // I used this scoop) and gently form into 11-12 small discs. Optional: Sprinkle on panko bread crumbs and gently press to adhere - flip and repeat. This will produce a crispier crust but is optional. Heat a large skillet over medium heat and add enough oil to generously coat the pan - about 2 Tbsp. Swirl to coat. Once the oil is hot, add only as many falafel as will fit very comfortably in the pan at a time - about 5. Cook for a total of 4-5 minutes, flipping when the underside is deep golden brown. Repeat until all falafel are browned - the deeper golden brown they are, the crispier they'll be. They will also firm up more once slightly cooled. Serve warm with garlic-dill sauce or hummus, inside a pita with desired toppings or atop a bed of greens. Best when fresh, though leftovers will keep in the refrigerator covered for several days. Freeze after that to keep fresh for up to 1 month. Notes

*Nutrition information is a rough estimate for 1 of 12 falafel without sauce. *Recipe loosely adapted from Tori Avey *Nutrition information is a rough estimate for 1 of 12 falafel without sauce. Nutrition Information Serving size: 1 falafel Calories: 91 Fat: 5.8g Saturated fat: 0.5g Carbohydrates: 8.1g Sodium: 87mg Fiber: 1.6g Protein: 2.2g 3.5.3226