Saturday

4. Bohemian Brunch | Noon

Warehouse-chic style arrives in Dubai courtesy of Tom & Serg, an Australian-Spanish pair whose namesake restaurant fills a soaring, neo-industrial space with tall windows, exposed ducts and hanging light bulbs. The menu is equally large and international, mixing brunch-style bites like corned-beef eggs Benedict (49 dirhams) and breakfast burritos (59 dirhams) with lunchtime fare like seared tuna with soba noodles (51 dirhams) and sea bass (69 dirhams) with Mideast-tinged sides like tangy eggplant purée and rice pilaf with pistachios. Then visit the pastry counter to choose among bread pudding, carrot cake and many other house-made desserts.

5. Art Street | 2 p.m.

Like a Hollywood studio lot, each of the warehouses within nearby Alserkal Avenue — an enclosed arts district housing over 20 galleries that is undergoing a major expansion — offers a window into a fascinating universe. Salsali Private Museum, a sleek space outfitted with classic midcentury chairs and a mini-cinema, shows mainly Iranian and Middle Eastern artists. Grey Noise, which has exhibited at international fairs like Frieze and Art Basel, presents highly conceptual projects, while the more accessible Gulf Photo Plus shows international photographic works. For inspiration, hit A4, the district’s dedicated cafe, lounge, library, cinema, fashion boutique and ideas incubator. A cafe latte runs 20 dirhams.

6. Stilettos and Smoothies | 5 p.m.

Megamalls? Meh. Ditch Dubai’s oversized, overpopulated, overwhelming retail cathedrals and instead stroll down Jumeirah Beach Road to seek out its small indie boutiques. Slip into the Closet, part of a small new trend of Dubai consignment stores, for red leather Jimmy Choo stilettos (600 dirhams) and a funky floral Marc Jacobs scarf (200 dirhams) for a fraction of the retail cost. For ethno-chic silvery teapots (315 dirhams), embroidered cushions (350 dirhams) and Taschen tomes, French-owned Comptoir 102 serves it all up — along with fresh juices, smoothies, coffees and teas. Sharing a villa, Bambah stocks the designer Maha Abdul Rasheed’s haute couture — mainly glamorous evening wear recalling Hollywood’s golden age — while the Zoo Concept provides kitsch-cool accessories and novelties (a clear plastic clutch embossed with an Emirati flag, ladies?) chosen by Ms. Rasheed’s brother Hussein.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

7. Mideast Feast | 8 p.m.

Get out your hyphens. Qbara fuses an innovative east-west, neo-traditional, Arabo-Levantine-Persian-Ottoman mash-up menu in a bi-level, low-lit, Moorish-chic den of sultriness. Faster than a flying carpet, the kitchen can transport you to Yerevan via Aleppo (a sweet-salty hybrid of air-dried beef basterma with tangy peaches and halloumi cheese) and Marrakesh (a smoky synthesis of quail in grilled grape leaves with Moroccan spices) followed by stops in Istanbul (gelatinous red-fruit Turkish delight coated in a chocolate shell with rosé-flavored ice cream) or Shiraz (Persian pear sorbet). The fat wine book, with vintages extending from the States to Syria, includes a lovely, light, dry, mineral rosé from Chateau Massaya in Lebanon (65 dirhams per glass). Three-course dinner for two, without drinks, is around 700 dirhams.

8. Go With the Glow | 11 p.m.

The roofs are on fire in Dubai as top-floor, open-air bars sprout citywide. Everything glows atop the recently opened Dubai branch of Pacha, the Ibiza-based megaclub. The lights glow red. The dome with the trompe-l’oeil sky glows blue. The futuristic Meduse water pipes glow in multiple hues. And the iconic sail-shaped Burj Al Arab hotel next door glows gargantuan white. You’ll be glowing too after a few Iberian Cherry Rosé Martinis (mixed with vodka, tomato and rosemary; 75 dirhams). The glimmer (and glamour) continues at 40 Kong, a 40-story vantage point over the city with an orange-glowing bar, white-glowing low tables and pillars of fire in wire cages. The Kong cocktail (bourbon, vanilla liqueur, orgeat syrup, lime, mint, ginger beer; 90 dirhams) is king.

Sunday

9. Beef Blanket Bingo | 10 a.m.

Dubai’s most abundant natural resource — sand — is free and prime for exploitation along the emirate’s expansive, well-maintained public beaches. Kite Beach, tucked behind Le Wazawan restaurant on Jumeirah Beach Road, attracts global cool kids, young professionals and hipster families with its golden sands, placid waters, volleyball areas, laid-back vibe and multiple food kiosks. For lunch, follow the swimsuited bodies and smell of grilling Wagyu beef to SALT — the two adjacent Airstream trailers enjoy a cult following for their miniburgers (two for 35 dirhams) topped with melted cheese and jalapeño slices.

Photo

10. Spices and Gold | Noon

Save a 1-dirham coin to cross Dubai Creek — actually a wide, powerful river — on one of the old wooden abra boats departing from the embankment near the textile souk. You’ll glide past Sinbad-worthy old dhow ships before alighting in the Iranian-Indian-Pakistani working-class district of Deira. Across the street, the bazaar called Souk El-Kabeer enfolds a warren of shops selling everything from spices to water pipes to ironing boards. A few blocks away, the shop windows of the Gold Souk gleam with buttery and brilliant rings, ropes, necklaces, pendants, brooches and other 24-karat concoctions. Bling notwithstanding, the neighborhood retains a traditional, down-to-earth feel and recalls the Dubai of yore, before the emirate’s skyscrapers, seven-star hotels and world-domination schemes.

Where to Stay

Amid the historic quarter’s galleries and shops, Orient Guest House (Al Fahidi Historical District, orientguesthouse.com) occupies an Old World courtyard house with 11 rooms of traditional Arabian furniture and fabrics. From 300 dirhams.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Opened in 2014 on Palm Jumeirah island, the 319-room Waldorf-Astoria Dubai Palm Jumeirah (Crescent East; Plot C-34; ar.hilton.com/en) is a palatial spread. Doubles from 920 dirhams (summer low season) or 1,525 (high season).