The pragmatic need to appeal to modern audiences, who expect to be surrounded by technology, is one engine of change. But museum officials insist there is a powerful aesthetic and cultural rationale as well. It is the increasing recognition that, as Paola Antonelli, senior curator of architecture and design at the Museum of Modern Art, puts it, “We live not in the digital, not in the physical, but in the kind of minestrone that our mind makes of the two.”

Museums, Ms. Antonelli insists, have an important role to play in helping people explore and understand the emerging hybrid culture. “It’s this strange moment of change,” she explained. “And digital space is increasingly another space we live in.”

The museum of the future will come in evolutionary steps. But some steps are already being taken. Digital technologies being deployed or developed include: augmented reality, a sort of smart assistant software that delivers supplemental information or images related to an artwork to a smartphone; high-definition projections of an artwork, a landscape or night sky that offer an immersive experience; and 3-D measurement and printing technology that lets people reproduce, hold and feel an accurate replica of an object.

In December, Cooper Hewitt, Smithsonian Design Museum will reopen, offering its vision of a 21st-century design museum. The three-year, $91 million renovation will give the Fifth Avenue museum 60 percent more gallery space and new visitor experiences.

Upon entry, each visitor will get a black pen, equipped with a small amount of computer memory, a tiny radio for short-range communication and a touch-sensitive stylus, which can be used to write and draw on large interactive tables with touch-screen surfaces. The digital pen is one ingredient in the redesign of the museum that is intended to “give visitors explicit permission to play and to explore the process of designing for themselves,” said Sebastian Chan, director of digital and emerging media at Cooper Hewitt.

One place they will be able to do that is in an “immersion room.” In the room, a person can, for example, tap the pen on one of many selections from the museum’s wallpaper design collection. That wallpaper is then projected clearly throughout the room. “You can see and experience historic wallpapers in ways you never could before,” Mr. Chan said.

A visitor can also draw his or her own wallpaper design on an interactive table. As the person is drawing, clever software can detect common images, retrieve relevant information and communicate, in its way, with the visitor. “It looks like you’re drawing a flower,” it intones, and then links to a short audio recording by an expert on flower motifs in wallpaper over the years.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In another area, visitors can use their pens to annotate the designs of common objects — a shopping cart, for example — with features of their imagining. One shopping cart might be designed for a family of four, while another is for a wheelchair-bound shopper. “It’s a visual suggestion box to make things better,” Mr. Chan said.

At the Smithsonian Institution, 3-D technology is increasingly used for conservation, research and public education programs. The fine-grained scanning allows a depth of data collection and analysis that was not possible before. The gunboat Philadelphia, built in 1776, is the last surviving cannon-bearing American vessel from the Revolutionary War. The historic boat has been 3-D-scanned so online viewers can see it from angles not possible in person at the National Museum of American History in Washington. But it is also scanned regularly so conservators can get early warnings of deterioration of the old wooden structure.

The National Portrait Gallery in Washington has two life masks of Abraham Lincoln. The masks — made from plaster casts placed on Lincoln’s face — were made in 1860, the year he was elected to his first term, and in 1865, two months before he was assassinated. The Smithsonian staff has 3-D-scanned the life masks, and the data is available for downloading and printing on a standard 3-D printer. Schools across America have done just that.

“You can see the toll the Civil War took on this man, those decisions of life and death,” said Günter Waibel, director of the digitization program at the Smithsonian. “With your finger, you can trace the deep furrows on Lincoln’s face. It sends shivers down your spine.”

Across the Smithsonian’s 19 museums, 3-D projects are still relatively few. But Mr. Waibel predicts they will proliferate in number and reach. “It’s incredible technology that will revolutionize not only how people experience objects,” he said, “but how we do research and science inside the museums.”

The abundant 3-D data, according to Mr. Waibel, could one day become the information building blocks for creating rich 3-D experiences — perhaps holograms that can be programmed according to a person’s interests.

In the museum world, augmented reality can mean any technology that gives visitors additional information, from audio tours to websites. The Met’s new application for Apple mobile devices, introduced in September, is a good example of a well-designed smartphone app, with lists of current exhibits and daily events, as well as artworks recommended for serious museumgoers and for families with children.

But as technology advances, so do the ambitions for augmented reality. Colleen Stockmann, assistant curator for special projects at the Cantor Arts Center at Stanford University, and Jean-Baptiste Boin, a Ph.D. candidate in electrical engineering at Stanford and an expert in computer vision, are working on taking augmented reality a step further. Their research project, Art++, combines image-recognition technology and computer graphics with art history expertise. Art++ is supported by a grant from the Brown Institute for Media Innovation, a partnership between the Columbia Graduate School of Journalism and Stanford’s School of Engineering.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

With their software, a person would walk into a museum, turn his or her smartphone or tablet toward a photograph, painting or sculpture, and the artwork is surrounded with a digital halo of supplemental information. The Cantor center, Ms. Stockmann said, exhibited the Stanford University Libraries’ collection of landscape photographs of California and the Northwest by the 19th-century photographer Carleton Watkins. Capture the image of a Watkins photo of Yosemite Valley, she said, and you can tap on an icon that shows a map of where Watkins walked in the valley to take his photographs.

Focus the smartphone’s camera viewfinder on a painting, and software might show the initial drawings underneath a painting, and earlier versions of the painting with colors changing as the artist progressed, Ms. Stockmann noted. Capture the image of a mummy in a museum, and the software might show an image of the skeleton beneath. The literature, poetry and music of the time an artist was working, and short commentaries by curators, could be presented as audio clips.

The goal of such technology, Ms. Stockmann said, is to “give you more points of access into the artwork, so that it keeps you in the moment of looking, almost as if someone is guiding you through the painting or sculpture.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

One futuristic vision, put simply, is of a digital docent. Elizabeth Merritt doesn’t use the phrase, but that is very much what she has in mind. “I’m waiting for a Watson museum mentor that learns, so it adopts and is personalized to my interests and level of knowledge,” said Ms. Merritt, founding director of the Center for the Future of Museums at the American Alliance of Museums. “That’s my wild idea for where this digital technology is going.”

Ms. Merritt was referring to IBM’s Watson, which bested human champions in the TV question-and-answer game “Jeopardy!” in 2011. IBM has worked to apply the Watson artificial intelligence technology in many fields, including medicine, where it assists with diagnoses. And her museum mentor concept may not be so wild, after all. Jon Iwata, an IBM senior vice president and a member of the Cooper Hewitt board of trustees, called it “a very good idea,” one that IBM might well consider collaborating with a museum to pursue.

In the field of contemporary art, museums have been nudged down the digital path by artists themselves and the work they are producing. “Artists are using these tools, and that has forced museums to think about digital tools for things beyond marketing and outreach,” observed Nancy Proctor, the deputy director for digital experience at the Baltimore Museum of Art, which she joined from the Smithsonian earlier this year.

R. Luke DuBois, a digital artist, describes his work as “using the tools of our time — digital media, computing and data.” He has applied those modern instruments to portraits, of people and of American life. The National Portrait Gallery commissioned Mr. DuBois to do a portrait of Google’s founders, Sergey Brin and Larry Page. The resulting work — displayed this year at the Ringling Museum of Art in Sarasota, Fla., and scheduled to go to the National Portrait Gallery next spring — is an amusing exercise in the self-referential use of technology.

On the left of two screens are interviews with the Google founders on YouTube, which Google owns. Mr. DuBois then used Google’s speech recognition software to search their words, and on the right-hand screen are continuous cascades of word clusters and patterns — a work of abstract text art, and pure Google.

“Google the Googlers was the conceit,” said Mr. DuBois, co-director of the Brooklyn Experimental Media Center at the New York University School of Engineering.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In “A More Perfect Union,” Mr. DuBois downloaded 19 million profiles from 21 online dating sites. He then wrote software to sort them by ZIP code, and determine the words most frequently used in each location. In the resulting maps, the top-ranked words replace city names. New York is “Now.” Atlanta is “God.”

In another text-mining piece, “Hindsight Is Always 20/20,” Mr. DuBois analyzed State of the Union messages over the years for the words most commonly used. In George Washington’s, the most common word was “gentlemen.” In George W. Bush’s, it was “terror.”

“I try to use data science to really investigate who we are, in ways we don’t really think about much,” Mr. DuBois said.

Museum curators and administrators do have concerns about the expense of digital initiatives and how to encourage more “look up” experiences — up at the art instead of down at a smartphone or tablet. Yet it is striking the degree to which major museums have welcomed digital technology as not only inevitable but also as an ally in bringing culture to a wider public.

Not long ago, museums were concerned that opening up collections and putting images online would shift viewing online and hurt museum attendance. “That has proved completely wrong,” said Ms. Barratt of the Met. “Culturally, what we see is the opposite. When people can see artworks online, it’s a taste and they want to see more, often in person if they can.”

Within museum walls, Ms. Barratt said, there should be a range of viewing choices, guided by the principle, she added, of “letting the content determine what we do, instead of letting the technology and devices lead the way.”

Those experiences, she said, will run from “no tech” to “high tech.” No tech, Ms. Barratt explained, would be a label and simple description for a classic painting that speaks for itself and invites sustained observation. High tech, she said, would be exhibitions like the recent one at the Met’s Costume Institute, “Charles James: Beyond Fashion.” It included animations showing the construction of gowns designed by the American couturier, and robotic arms employed to scan and analyze the gowns. The technology provided a visual explanation of how James used science, engineering and architectural techniques.

The issues about sharing artwork online came to a head a few years ago, when Google began Art Project. The Internet giant planned to scoop up images of artworks and present virtual tours of museums, using high-definition camera technology. Museum curators worried about matters of copyright and commercialization — that Google would try to profit from the images shared by the museums. But Google signed contracts with the museums including copyright protections and pledges not to use the art images for commercial gain.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Art Project began with 17 museums in 2010, including the Met, and today has 500 institutions in 60 countries, and 7.2 million artworks. Google’s high-definition image technology captures the image of a painting like Bruegel’s 16th-century classic, “The Harvesters,” which is at the Met, in roughly 10 billion pixels, well beyond the power of the human eye. The technology allows online viewers and researchers to zoom in to see details, down to brush strokes and scratches, in a way they could not in person.

Art Project proved to be a reassuring lesson for the museums. “Only good came from something we worried would backfire,” Ms. Barratt said.

Amit Sood, who led the Google project and handled the early negotiations himself, learned a few things as well. He recalled a conversation with the head of one major European museum who was initially cautious about the Google proposal. Young man, the museum director explained, this institution has been around for centuries, having seen wars, governments and corporations come and go. The museum was more popular than ever, the director added, and a certain deliberation was part of its sustaining culture.

“I learned not to underestimate museums,” recalled Mr. Sood, director of the Google Cultural Institute in London. “They were a little slow to the digital game. That’s a good thing,” avoiding costly missteps and trial and error.

The new things like social media and mobile apps are important to the future of museums, but mainly by working hand in hand with what is timeless. In a talk last month, Sreenath Sreenivasan surveyed what he had learned as a newcomer to the museum world during his first year as the Met’s chief digital officer. One telling statistic, he noted, was that one-third of the Met’s considerable online traffic goes to a single destination — its timeline of art history. It conveys the importance of human history in art, going back to 8,000 B.C., with images of 7,000 objects and more than 900 scholarly essays. The lesson, Mr. Sreenivasan said, is that “expertise matters.”

“What our wonderful curators say and do matters,” he said. “We need to embrace that in more and more ways.”

Museums, according to recent research, need not fear that digital experiences, no matter how good, will supplant in-person visits. In a paper published in August in the journal Topics in Cognitive Science, two researchers from Yale and one from the University of Chicago point out that people intuitively associate an essence of its creator with a work of art. The phenomenon is sometimes called “magical contagion,” and the authors strongly suggest an affirmative answer to the question posed by the paper’s title, “Are Artworks More Like People Than Artifacts?”

“Virtual art will never psychologically replace the real,” said Ms. Merritt of the Center for the Future of Museums, “because a piece of the creator is attached to the object itself.”