Say that you have two children, or maybe three, and that they fight for what’s theirs. The contested objects are many: cake, Lego sets, the right to various household electronics or to name the family dog. And the children aren’t pleasant about it: they torment each other, and engage in guerrilla tactics distinguishable from those of ruthless insurgents only by their disregard for stealth, which might at least allow you, the parent, a little peace and quiet. Each of them has a story about fairness and what he deserves. But how much do they really want to win? What would they give up to get dominion over the remote control? It is hard to know anything about these small belligerents other than what they are willing to pay, Paul Raeburn and Kevin Zollman write in “The Game Theorist’s Guide to Parenting: How the Science of Strategic Thinking Can Help You Deal with the Toughest Negotiators You Know—Your Kids” (Scientific American/Farrar, Straus & Giroux). Raeburn, a journalist, and Zollman, a game theorist and philosopher at Carnegie Mellon, maintain that the best move for the mother of these children is to hold an auction—after determining whether market conditions call for an open-cry-first-price auction, a sealed-bid-second-price auction, an English-clock auction, or a Dutch auction—and begin taking bids. (“Mom is an economist, naturally.”) One kid offers four dollars, another ten; the winner bids twelve dollars. The losers walk away satisfied, in the smug conviction that their winning sibling has overpaid. There is really only one problem left for the mother: “What do you do with the money you make in the auction?” Excess money is not a problem that bedevils most families, and Raeburn and Zollman recognize that collecting cash each evening might not be the wisest move, largely because they distrust the redistributionist impulses it could inspire. (Suppose a parent was weak enough to buy ice cream for the child who bankrupted himself to win the auction—that could unleash all sorts of moral hazards.) They advise parents to make labor the currency of the auction, and then “sit back and count your loot,” in the form of a clean house crisscrossed by chore-performing auction winners and puppies named in accordance with market forces. It is one of the many moments when one wonders whether the book has much relevance to what the authors refer to, at one point, as “real-life children.” Game theory, in its modern form, was developed in the nineteen-forties and fifties, when the U.S. military considered it crucial to handling a possible nuclear showdown with the Soviet Union. The notion of managing children with it seems appropriate to the threat level imagined by American parents today. There is a Cold War insistence on the proper signifiers of prosperity alongside a presentiment of doom. In this spirit, “The Game Theorist’s Guide to Parenting” is also a consumerist manual. Its games are staged in the kind of household in which the parents have advanced degrees, Lego sets are a standard incentive, and the twins will eagerly bid against each other to decide whose friend gets “the cool L.L. Bean Katahdin 35 ° sleeping bag” at a slumber party, instead of “a couple of ragged sheets.” The children basically share their parents’ tastes and aspirations, except when, for example, little Max joins his sister in using game-theory tactics to maneuver their parents into getting hamburgers instead of going to a Japanese restaurant. (“If he hadn’t voted strategically, he might have been stuck eating a spicy tuna roll. Yuck!”) What the book shares with the current parenting moment is the sense that trust is a commodity that’s in very short supply. Thomas, for example, is getting reasonable grades “in his elementary school’s gifted-and-talented program,” but is he really doing his best? Or is he “fibbing” about how hard he’s working, “thinking about Minecraft” when he should be hunkered down with his book project? Raeburn and Zollman suggest deploying the “principal-agent model” to manage the case of “possible underperformers such as Thomas,” with the caveat that, if the incentives are too great, he’d have good reason to cheat. Without measures like “perfect monitoring” and “credible threats” (“Parents and caregivers can use each other as Doomsday machines”), children will give in to a tendency to lie. In the world of game theory, this is not so much a moral problem as a practical one. Without constant child-control manipulations, the middle-class home will fall apart, and there are no limits to the anxiety this creates. Mastering the possible outcomes of the prisoner’s dilemma might be less helpful than considering who, in the American family today, is the prisoner.

“What parents owe their children” has been a central question in America since the beginning of the Republic, Paula Fass writes in “The End of American Childhood: A History of Parenting from the Frontier to the Managed Child” (Princeton)—much more so than what children owed their parents. American children didn’t even have to deliver politeness: their rudeness is the stuff of intercontinental, multicentury legend. Foreigners have always been horrified by American parents’ deferral to their children’s prerogatives. “Baby citizens are allowed to run as wild as the Snake Indians and do whatever they please,” a nineteenth-century visitor wrote. Confoundingly, these early visitors also professed shock that American parents gave their children what the Europeans saw as responsibilities beyond their years, often in the form of chores or the care of younger children. Depending on what the rest of the world was up to, visitors saw the behavior of American children as an example of all that was wrong with democracy, capitalism, mass culture, social mobility, or McDonald’s; they weren’t sure whether the children they saw were being idolized, adored, neglected, exploited, or unduly emulated. Americans have never been quite sure, either. We seem to have moved, at various times, from giving children important things to do to regarding every childish thing they do as important. From the beginning, the goal of parenting, in the American mind, has been to “liberate generations from each other,” Fass writes, which meant that the child would do better than his parents, even as the country did. Failing to believe that a child could become anything was, in some essential way, to reject the myth of America. This ethos inverted the European critique of the disobedient American: to repudiate a patriarchal family model was to affirm the goodness of democracy and the greatness of America. A 1900 Ladies’ Home Journal article, which Fass quotes, describes an American propensity to regard children “as the heir to all the good things of time,” and notes that “the boy from his cradle knows his importance.” (The “boy” part is significant.) Setting our kids free would, among other things, make them rich. We like rude children, and admire the ones who can manipulate us into getting hamburgers, because it is a sign that this project is working. This scenario puts enormous pressure on the parent viewed as largely responsible for character, the mother. In the early days of the Republic, when infant mortality was high, there were publications filled with advice for mothers on how to keep children alive, alongside poems of comfort for those who were mourning children they’d lost. As medicine made progress, and families could be more reliably planned, experts tried “to salvage the independent child at a time when having fewer children allowed for more concentrated maternal attention,” Fass writes. This yielded endless books on “adjustment,” which meant adjustment to an eventual life without Mother. Overprotective mothers were seen as robbing their children of their American inheritance. Naturally, the insufficiently protective mother, who failed to usher her child to full, productive, independent success, was seen as even worse. In the eighteen-nineties, “rescuing” children became almost synonymous with separating them from their family’s influence. We adore Huck while thinking that it would be just as well if Pap were lying in a ditch. Somehow, we don’t trust women to make similar judgments. Worship of the independent child has never extended to the independent mother. Even as politicians complain about a “culture of dependency,” they ignore the ways in which single mothers provide an actual example of self-sufficiency, instead condemning them for failing to insure the presence of a father. As Stephanie Coontz notes in “The Way We Never Were: American Families and the Nostalgia Trap” (first published in 1992, with a revised and updated edition out this year), we also ignore what many of those women left behind. One study Coontz cites found that, in the first five years after several states instituted no-fault divorce, their rates of marital domestic violence fell by thirty per cent. Wives’ suicide rates, in those states, dropped by between eight and sixteen per cent.