When we first heard about The 7-Minute Workout, an app that promises to grant you the benefits of a sweaty bike ride and a trip to the gym in just a few minutes, we thought it was all hype. But as it turns out, the app actually, well, works you out. We tried it for the first time in January, and we're still hooked. It's become so popular that The New York Times recently released its own version of the app. It's perfect on the weekends, when I can't make it to a yoga class, or as something fun to do with a friend at home. Here's how it works: View As: One Page Slides

First things first: The entire workout takes just seven minutes, and it looks super simple. Initially, I was skeptical I could accomplish this much in such a narrow time frame.

It consists of 12 standard exercises like jumping jacks, sit-ups, and push-ups. Ten of them require nothing but your own body (you'll need a chair that can support your weight for the others). The Times' version of the app shows proper positioning for each, which you do for 30 seconds.

To do my workout, all I used was a yoga mat, the hardwood floor of my office, a wall, and a stool.

The first four exercises — 30 seconds each of jumping jacks, a wall sit, push-ups, and crunches, with 10 seconds of rest in between — were easy peasy. I started to think the workout was all hype.

But by the time I got to exercise No. 8 — the plank — I was starting to feel a bit winded. At this point, I'd also finished the step-ups onto a chair, the squats, and the triceps dips. Still four exercises to go.

Full set of 12 exercises complete!

In the end, the workout was actually, well, a workout. Still, I wasn't totally wiped and I felt as if I could do a bit more. So I did a second set.

The idea of a workout you can do in minutes was originally envisioned by personal trainer Brett Klika and exercise physiologist Chris Jordan of the Johnson & Johnson Human Performance Institute in Orlando, Florida. Here's Klika demonstrating one of his workouts. Sources: American College of Sports Medicine's (ACSM's) Health & Fitness Journal, YouTube

The concept behind the workout is interval training — short, intense periods of exercise broken up by brief periods of rest. It's less time-consuming than a traditional workout, but studies suggest it may actually be more beneficial. Sources: International Journal of Cardiology 2013, ACSM's Health & Fitness Journal 2013, Sports Medicine 2002

Several studies back high-intensity interval training for building muscle and helping to protect the heart. But since this specific workout is still pretty new, we don't have long-term studies comparing it to traditional workouts yet. Sources: International Journal of Cardiology 2013, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 2011