The Pisces Woman

The Pisces Woman: Love, Sex, Friendship, Style

The Pisces Woman

Spinning lazy circles around her latest conquest, acquisition, or interest, the Piscean woman is a mysterious, sensual mermaid, her secrets kept secure behind inscrutable dark eyes. She has a vivid mind, and is romantic and spiritual. Like the rivers and seas this sign swims in, Piscean women have deep emotions and strong undertows in their personalities, so watch out for still waters – they often hide a passionate, sensitive nature.

Spiritual, curious, and gentle, the Pisces woman is a true dreamer. She puts a great deal of emphasis on the unseen in her life, whether it be her own intuition, her emotions, or the world of spirituality and religion. This is a woman who is always looking for – and finding – deeper meaning, from the grand scheme of life itself to her own social interactions. She absorbs the events around her, making connections that other people would never even see. She observes patterns in the feelings and actions of other people, and can be quite insightful as to what motivates them.

Pisceans are often artists, expressing their inner passions through paint, dance or song. Their work is often whimsical and outlandish, but always enchanting. Some famous Piscean women include Anais Nin, Elizabeth Taylor, and Liza Minnelli.

Pisces the Fish: Associations

Dates: February 19-March 20

Ruler : Neptune

Element: Water

Quality: Mutable

Color: Blue-Green Day: Thursday

Stone: Aquamarine

Part of Body Ruled: Feet

Motto: I believe

Energy: Yin

*Sun sign dates are always approximate, as starting and ending dates can vary from year to year.

Pisces is the twelfth and final sign of the zodiac. Ruled by Neptune, the Pisces woman is very intuitive and spiritual. She is sensitive and caring and considers the needs of others. This imaginative and dreamy woman must determine how she will swim through life: with the flow or against it. Pisceans are kind to their friends – and strangers. At any gathering, the Pisces woman will either be the shy one in the corner who will listen to people’s problems or the outgoing greeter who warmly welcomes each individual. It all depends on her current mood!

The Pisces woman is a daydreamer and can quickly escape the harsh realities of life by slipping into a world where she can be whatever she desires, wherever she wants. Some may think she runs from her problems; others believe she’s simply found a creative way of handling them.

Pisces is ruled by dreamy Neptune, and her intuition runs deep. Like the stormy sea, her emotions are complex and changeable. Her challenge is to discern between essential truths of spirit and mere mirage.

Pisces in Love

Love in all its rose-tinted, glorious fantasy, is a Piscean’s playground. Romance and dreams take flight in her vivid imagination, swirling with colors and scintillating like light off the waves of the ocean. However, most fish find they have no land legs, so when the honeymoon period ends, this shy sign will engage in love slowly, and carefully.

A Pisces woman in love expects magic and mystery, like the watery, wonderful world of the deep blue. She loves being in love – to her it is a wistful daydream, a flight of fancy. It is a seduction of her senses, and there is nowhere else she would rather be.

Romance and the Pisces woman is like a summer storm, going from the warmth of a welcome rain, through clashes of thunder and lightning, then to the calm tranquility of its passing. She gives everything when it comes to love.

A faithful lover and devoted partner, nothing makes the Pisces woman feel more complete than being in love.

When it comes to attraction, Pisces’ secret weapon is evasiveness. There is an aura of mystery around Pisces, in addition to kindness, femininity, and softness. While you can’t exactly call her aloof, she maintains a subtle distance that keeps others intrigued. When in an emotional jam or argument, a partnered Pisces is likely to use a “who, me?” approach. Some have brought “playing dumb” to an art form, as they have discovered that this is the best way to avoid answering uncomfortable or awkward questions.

In love, Pisces gives a lot, but not everything. Most important to remember is this: it’s a mistake to assume Pisces is weak, but it’s also a mistake to assume Pisces is strong. She is both. The message is: don’t push her beyond her limits, because although it might appear that she has none, she does draw the line at some point. Avoid taking advantage of her good nature and willingness to make sacrifices. She sees her willingness to forgive and understand as a strength, and you should too. She is fully capable of re-inventing her life, even if that means a life without you. Nevertheless, you should also avoid labeling her as strong as well. She does need help sometimes, and can feel very lonely if the important person in her life leaves her alone to take care of her life when her life is a mess. She could easily interpret this attitude as a lack of concern and love on your part.

Pisces and Relationships

Swimming with the currents, most Piscean women are relaxed and laidback, which leads to an easygoing, relaxed relationship. A Piscean woman is pacifist by nature and would rather not rock the boat if there is not much to gain from it. Her relationships are imaginative and sensitive and very emotional, and she will need a lover who can safeguard her and provide a sense of security. She is generous in her relationships, evoking the bounty of the oceans, and can run the risk of giving too much. Her best partner is one who can inspire her, protect her and, when required, ground her fantasies.

Pisceans are extremely sensitive to the needs of others. In a world of takers, they are givers. These compassionate women are here to help others – it’s their mission – but please don’t take advantage.

Pisces and Friendships

Have you ever spoken to a Piscean girlfriend, only to have her blink confusedly at you when asked for her opinion on the topic at hand? Piscean women can sometimes seem to be floating off into their own private worlds, but they are also one of the most caring of friends you could ever have.

Ruled by Water, Piscean cups often runneth over and they have a surplus of empathy and emotion to share. A Piscean woman is extremely intuitive, often picking up on your moods before even you yourself have made head, gill, or fin of them. They seek comfort in shoals, and will always have a shoulder offered in support, or ice cream and cake on girls’ nights in for their friends.

A Pisces woman is a devoted friend who puts her loved ones’ well-being before her own. She is an empathetic individual who is able to present sympathetic viewpoints when asked by friends and family – and they sometimes take advantage of this trait, too much so in many cases.

Although not normally a leader, the Pisces woman possesses a powerful, yet restrained character and is often called upon by friends, family, and co-workers to guide them through a crucial situation.

Easygoing and selfless, the Pisces woman will have a lot of friends from all walks of life, all personalities, religions, and ethnic origins. Uniquely perceptive, her understanding of people makes this woman popular within her social circles.

A Pisces woman can sometimes be evasive and even avoidant. Do not take this personally! Pisces need time for themselves and often have trouble saying no. If she can get around having to say no, she probably will choose that route!

Pisces and Sex

Like all other aspects of her life, sex is an emotional matter for a Piscean woman. She is sensual and playful, prone to creating fanciful settings in the bedroom – enchanted forests, circles of candlelight, the scent of the sea – all these heighten her imagination. She loves sex and likes to have everything fluid and a little erratic. The more surprises the better. The Piscean woman does not naturally or easily separate sex and love as these two factors indissolubly bound together for her.

Sexually, Pisces is naturally on the submissive side, very willing to please, will try most anything, and generally easily orgasmic. The desire to connect to something more through the sexual act is strong. This is especially true for those with Moon and/or Mars in Pisces.

Pisces and Career

Forget a normal office job because the corporate world just isn’t for the Pisces woman. She needs to use her creativity and when allowed to do so, dedicates herself wholly to the tasks at hand. This is not to say Pisces can’t handle a regular nine-to-five, because many do; it’s just that eventually Pisceans will get to a point where they crave something more creative.

The Pisces woman might consider being a counselor, writer, musician, librarian, detective, social worker, or designer.

Dreamers like the Pisces woman are usually kind-hearted and considerate, so what better vocation would suit a woman with the Zodiac sign of two fishes than a veterinarian?

Pisces is associated with the arts, musicians, social workers, psychics, photographers, doctors, humanitarians, artisans, and media relations.

Some Pisceans have a difficult time setting forth a course of action for themselves. Instead, they seem to float along with a childlike trust in the universe to guide them the right way. These young Pisces may need guidance and grounding.

The Pisces woman may have multiple careers at different stages in her life. She is naturally creative which would explain why so many Pisceans are attracted to both sides of the camera in the entertainment industry. She’s full of gusto and enthusiasm for many different careers and sometimes takes a while to settle on only one. Working a steady job is nice for her if she gets to use her intelligence and her imagination.

Pisces and Money

Handling money may not be the Pisces woman’s strong point unless she has more practical signs dominant in her chart. Even though she’s very intuitive, she can also be impractical and find herself making financial decisions based on emotion rather than logic.

The Pisces woman must be wary of those who are trying to sell her financial advice, insurances, properties, or get-rich-quick schemes. The Pisces woman has a habit of getting caught up in the moment, and most of all feeling for the person selling her something, and rational thinking may temporarily go right out the window. She wouldn’t pull one over on someone else just to make a quick buck, so she has a hard time imagining that others would do the same with her.

Nevertheless, Pisces women realize the importance of a dollar and are pretty good at making it stretch.

Pisces and Family

Pisces women will go to great lengths to please their families. A Pisces mother loves her children to the moon and back, but sometimes she may find it hard to discipline them. She is prepared to sacrifice everything so that they can have and achieve their dreams, even at the expense of her own. She always remembers birthdays and anniversaries, so it pays to remember hers because it’s very important to her. She will make a warm home out of the simplest apartment. Ms. Pisces may need to be near a body of water–even if it’s only a small pond. Don’t worry; she’ll imagine it’s an ocean!

Pisces and Health

As one can expect, the emotional intensity of a Pisces woman means that she will be susceptible to headaches, but they could also be a result of some overindulgences. Excesses in drinking, eating, and late nights can sometimes play havoc with her health and contribute to her sometimes low levels of energy. Pisces are not typically slaves to schedules, and this can be a wonderful thing, but if excessive, can have some consequences. With her sign’s connection to the feet, foot massage and acupuncture can be especially helpful.

Moderation and exercise: two words that don’t normally excite a Pisces woman, but that are important for overall health.

Pisces and Fashion

Water does not like constraints, and similarly, Piscean women tend to favor loose, flowing, graceful silhouettes. This little mermaid is most in tune with her world when she is comfortable, wearing clothes that are silky and soft – no binding zippers or corsets for her! A Pisces woman loves shimmer, like light on water, and will adorn herself with jewelry in unexpected places. Anklets, toe rings, and moonstone brooches worn in cascades of hair are her favored fashion accessories.

Her special gemstone is jade, and is particularly appropriate in jewelry for the hands and feet (rings, bracelets, toe rings, and so forth), as Pisces rules the feet. She also does well with the amethyst. Her main color is sea green. Pisces generally looks best in ocean shades of blue and green, and often steers clear of overly bright colors.

Because Pisces is somewhat of a chameleon, she is quite flexible when it comes to style and fashion. She dislikes constructs and stereotypes, and doesn’t like to be a slave to current trends. As well, she doesn’t like restrictive clothing, preferring to ease in and out of her wardrobe effortlessly. Luckily, she can usually get away with pretty much anything. She possesses an unusual quality in that she can blend in yet somehow remain unique. Pisces has a flair for fantasy, drama, and make-believe, and sometimes this is apparent in her particular style. She often has a greater than average love for shoes! Pisces tends to be averse to any style that is too forceful, restrictive, or overly defined. This is in keeping with a personality that is never harsh or austere. Soft lines, a shape that moves and breathes, and soft rather than primary colors are styles that suit the Piscean personality.

The Pisces Woman: Decanates

February 19 – March 1 – Pisces/ Pisces Decanate – those born in this decanate are the dreamers and the visionaries. They see poetry and beauty in all things.



March 2 – 11 – Pisces/Cancer Decanate – this decanate makes the female Piscean very sensitive to her surroundings and especially attached to home and family.



March 12 – 20 – Pisces/Scorpio Decanate – those born during this decanate tend to be a little more stubborn, they are passionate and intense, and will have career success in their middle years.

The Pisces Woman: Style

Lost in a world of dreams and creative urges, the Piscean woman exists in a world beyond fashion, yet she is not immune to it. She just makes her own, and on her, it becomes art. Her other-worldly qualities mean she can never be like anyone else, but it also makes her unforgettable.

She dresses as if life were really the stuff of her own fantasies. If she loves fairies, there will be something flowery and spring-like about the clothes she wears. If she is into mermaids, she will shine like mother of pearl. If she is into Gothic culture, she will be dark and mysterious. Her moods are vast as the ocean – she can be all of these things at the same time.

The Piscean woman loves floaty things. Soft fabrics such as silk, voile, and tissue tempt her to drape and design her own unique styles. Her deep love of art will see her painting her clothes or her body with fantastic designs. Her clothes will drape and fold in the most sensuous manner but she seems utterly unaware of how sexy she is. Her eyes are like stars reflected in pools of deep water, no matter what their color. Everything about the Piscean woman is touched with glamor and star shine.

Shopping with the Piscean woman is an out of this world experience. She is drawn like a magnet to new age shops, shops selling exotic goods, and places that are piled high with eclectic goods, like bazaars. She loves to rummage around and make discoveries. She is the one who will come across a crystal ball, an old pack of tarot cards, or a fabulous embroidered velvet cloak for a song. No one knows how she does it. She seems too much off with the pixies to be a bargain hunter, but she has an unbelievable instinct for finding bargains.

She has no real interest in fashion week or the great fashion houses. She reads magazines compulsively, but it is only to get ideas she can adapt for herself. She draws inspiration from Japanese streetwear and other anti-haute couture places. The Piscean woman loves her friends and loves to shop with them, and loves even more to get out her make-up and hair products and make them over. She always has a huge selection of make-up to choose from.

Among her supplies will be make up kits, shiny lip glosses in all colors of the rainbow, glittery body glosses and anything shimmery and shiny that caught her eye. She is an artist with makeup, painting a fantasy face rather than putting on an everyday face. The Piscean woman truly shines when it is time to dress up, and not just her personality. Everything shines and glitters.

She is a little more vague about skin care, although she loves sweet smelling body lotions and applies them religiously. Regular moisturizing and toning may have a more slapdash approach. Sweet aromatherapy is her special delight – she loves to be surrounded by her favorite fragrances. Her hair is her pride and joy, usually incredibly long and silky, and lovers beg her not to cut it.

The Piscean woman is big on accessorizing. She loves pearly shells, shiny buckles, and sparkling jewels. The Piscean woman is a hopeless romantic, who falls deeply and utterly in love, but she also has very high standards, and will reject any relationship that does not meet her needs. In return, to a lover who cherishes her, she will be the most devoted partner anyone could have.

Sexually she craves romance, but good sex will do just as well. She is incredibly creative in the sexual arena, and lovers may find themselves being painted with chocolate or strawberry syrup – or captured on canvas in the nude. Remember the song about making love on the dunes of the Cape? That was a Pisces woman.

Another water sign, Cancer or Scorpio, will share this depth of emotion, and her opposite sign, Virgo, will provide the grounding that the Piscean woman sometimes needs. But an extraordinary quality of this sign is that it can find true and lasting love almost anywhere, even with signs believed to be incompatible. How can that be? Maybe there is a touch of magic in Pisces, the twelfth and the most extraordinary sign of the zodiac.

The Pisces Woman: Attraction

Pisces is ruled by dreamy Neptune, and her intuition runs deep. Like the stormy sea, her emotions are complex and changeable. Her challenge is to discern between essential truths of spirit and mere mirage.

Her special gemstone is jade, and is particularly appropriate in jewelry for the hands and feet (rings, bracelets, toe rings, and so forth), as Pisces rules the feet. She also does well with the amethyst.

Her main color is sea green. Pisces generally looks best in ocean shades of blue and green, and often steers clear of overly bright colors.

Because Pisces is somewhat of a chameleon, she is flexible when it comes to style and fashion. She dislikes constructs and stereotypes, and doesn’t like to be a slave to current trends. As well, she is not usually fond of restrictive clothing, preferring to ease in and out of her wardrobe effortlessly. Luckily, she can usually get away with pretty much anything. She possesses an unusual quality in that she can blend in, yet somehow remain unique. Pisces has a flair for fantasy, drama, and make-believe, and sometimes this is apparent in her particular style. She often has a greater than average love for shoes!

Pisces tends to be averse to any style that is too forceful, restrictive, or overly defined. This is in keeping with a personality that is never harsh or austere. Soft lines, a shape that moves and breathes, and soft rather than primary colors are styles that suit the Piscean personality.

When it comes to attraction, Pisces’ secret weapon is evasiveness. There is an aura of mystery around Pisces, in addition to kindness, femininity, and softness. While you can’t exactly call her aloof, she maintains a subtle distance that keeps others intrigued.

When in an emotional jam or argument, a partnered Pisces is likely to use a “who, me?” approach. Some have brought “playing dumb” to an art form, as they have discovered that this is the best way to avoid answering uncomfortable or awkward questions.

In love, Pisces gives a lot, but not everything. Most important to remember is this: it’s a mistake to assume Pisces is weak, but it’s also a mistake to assume Pisces is strong. She is both. The message is: don’t push her beyond her limits, because although it might appear that she has none, she does draw the line at some point. Avoid taking advantage of her good nature and willingness to make sacrifices. She sees her willingness to forgive and understand as a strength, and you should too. She is fully capable of re-inventing her life, even if that means a life without you. Nevertheless, you should also avoid labeling her as strong as well. She does need help sometimes, and can feel very lonely if the important person in her life leaves her alone to take care of her life when her life is a mess. She could easily interpret this attitude as a lack of concern and love on your part.

Sexually, Pisces is naturally on the submissive side, very willing to please, will try most anything, and generally easily orgasmic. The desire to connect to something more through the sexual act is strong. This is especially true for those with Moon and/or Mars in Pisces.

With Uranus recently in Pisces (from 2003-2011), she is more independent and assertive than she was pre-2003. It may not be easy to tie her down, and the last thing she wants is to be labeled or confined.

See Also:

Pisces Horoscopes:



Pisces Daily Horoscope

Pisces Yearly Horoscope

Pisces Monthly Horoscope

Pisces Yearly Love Horoscope

Pisces Ascendant Daily Horoscope

Pisces Good Days Calendar

Future Forecast Report

2017 Pisces Preview Horoscope

All About Pisces

Pisces Ascendant

Pisces Compatibility:



Pisces Sun Sign Compatibility

Pisces Moon Sign Compatibility

Pisces Venus Sign Compatibility

Get the full scoop with a Love Styles: About Her Report. The report averages 25 pages long, and it’s all about a woman’s styles in love, in relationship, and in bed.

Don’t know the positions of your planets? Be sure to find out your personal astrology data online, at no cost.

Explore your relationship dynamics with a lover, partner, or love interest with a COMPATIBILITY REPORT.

See our Synastry article for more advanced relationship analysis techniques.

Intermediate and advanced students of Astrology might enjoy our article, SoulMate Astrology.

Determine the positions of Venus and Mars by sign and learn the sexual secrets of your partner, and yourself!

If you don’t know the positions of Venus and Mars, refer to these tables:

Venus Sign Table

Mars Sign Table

OR click here to find the positions of all your planets.