We’re all familiar with the old adage attributed to Ben Franklin (aka the 18th century idiom machine) that there are only two certainties in life: death and taxes. In our day and age, we should probably add a third: Google. Google search’s role in our lives is so paramount, it’s become a verb – we Google something just like we use a Kleenex or a Band-Aid.

Yet, what if Google’s centrality in our lives wasn’t as permanent as we think? At least not in the way Google works now. For in truth, the way we conduct searches today is still very old-fashioned. Information organization and aggregation is a core part of human history. And until recently, almost all human knowledge has been stored in books, with information indexed and overseen by a librarian who directs us to the answers we seek. Modern search engines are really just a digital version of this centuries-long practice. We are pointed towards resources embedded in the top 10 relevant links that can offer us an answer, but we’re not immediately given the answer in and of itself.

That paradigm will probably persist for quite a bit longer, but it likely won’t last forever. With the recent explosion of available data, and companies making sense of that data, search is evolving and as it does, the way content is produced and monetized will likely change radically as well. Rather than sourced from trillions of unstructured webpages, a semantic graph (also known as knowledge graph or knowledge base), is supported by highly structured data. The big shift for publishers and information providers will be the that the market will no longer only need unstructured information but also structured information and semantics graphs built out of them. This transformation is already upon us. When we talk to our cell phones and get an answer, we are using a semantic graph. To explore how this change is occurring, who will win, and what it will mean for search and SEO, I sat down with Ivan Bercovich, VP of Engineering at Graphiq, a semantic technology company in Santa Barbara, CA.

Why is search changing?

According to Bercovich, the main reason search is changing is because the way we interact with information and seek answers is transforming. We’re breaking away from the librarian interface. While this trend has existed for some time (Google Knowledge Graph was announced in 2012), this transition has been accelerated by the popularization of conversational interfaces. When we ask Apple Siri, or Amazon Alexa, or Microsoft Cortana a question, much of the time we’re not expecting, and we don’t receive, a list of links like we would with Google. When we ask Siri what the weather is in Denver, we don’t want a link to weather.com, we want a response that tells us it’s sunny and 75.

Knowledge graphs are made for this change. They’re founded on filling in the shortcomings of the human brain – namely that we’re great at pattern recognition, but bad at data storage. In most cases, data for humans is facts. A knowledge graph is an advanced way to map all of mankind’s knowledge on a particular topic to correct for these gaps. Obviously, this has extensions for the way we search and find information online.

The key here is that instead of looking for possible answers, under this new model we’re seeking an answer. We want the facts – where those facts come from are less important. We’re not reading whole websites anymore, let alone books. As Bercovich mentioned, “The old model was us asking the librarian. The new model is us asking a smart friend who is going to give us an answer.”

This could herald a radical shift in the way we search for information. Inevitably, in this new paradigm, the source of the information becomes far less important than the information itself. Knowledge graphs like Graphiq will aggregate what seems to be the best answers for given questions and then offer up those answers, and we won’t care as much whether they’re from the New York Times or Wikipedia, so long as they’re right. We won’t even know where the information is coming from unless we ask. The world would move from searches using unstructured to structured data. That poses a lot of questions about the long-term viability of content providers.

This new paradigm would have the benefit of being simpler. But it would also have a potential downside: who ensures that the answer we get is the right answer? Who controls the truth/ Namely, while Google search doesn’t provide us with an answer, it at least allows us to decide which of the existing resources out there we trust the most. Under the new paradigm, we’d be accepting that the answer we received was actually valid. Google’s limited attempts so far to prioritize sites or provide direct answers have led to controversy -- that they are dictating truth to the user. Debates like this will only increase in the future.

What this means for SEO

The consequences of this new paradigm on what information we are able to access are important. But so too are the consequences on the current SEO model. Right now, there is a symbiotic relationship between Google and content providers. Content publishers expect Google to funnel users back to their original site, and this funneling is how they generate revenue. But what happens if that funneling no longer occurs? How will content generators make money and will the SEO relationship between them and Google break down?

Bercovich thinks the new paradigm will lead to a simpler SEO process. Under the current model, SEO is time-consuming and requires a deftness and level of expertise on the content creators’ part in order to really achieve maximum optimization. We have to know how to Google, how to carefully frame our search terms to get exactly what we want. Meanwhile, content providers have to interpret countless cryptic or ambiguous rules, and suffer big consequences due to misinterpretation or sudden changes in the rules. Large media businesses have entire teams of people directing their SEO strategy. Why should that be the case, when much of the search business is about questions and answers? Shouldn’t the best answers- the correct answers- be presented?

For Bercovich, a knowledge graph-based search (known as semantic search) world solves these problems. There would be fewer and simpler rules to evaluate the quality of a “publisher”. And those rules would be more clear and measurable than today’s SEO guidelines. In a way, SEO would become a form of information wholesaling, in which two things would matter: the quality of the answer and the way in which that answer would be provided.

Yet, this could leave content providers in a precarious position. They wouldn’t be able to make money in the same way because content attribution would become far less relevant. Furthermore, unlike the current interface with 10 links, in a conversational interface only the top result (the only result) would get any action. A rethinking of how to monetize content would have to take place. Just look at Google AMP or Facebook Instant – both platforms offer up any content a user wants within the platform, rather than linking and redirecting the user to the source site. For content providers, they may begin to resent that their content is being used but they’re not getting the hits out of it. Bercovich speculated to me that paid content may have to increase for content providers to stay in business. Perhaps there will be a tiny monetary exchange every time distribution platforms like Google or Alexa chooses my answer, or there might be a bigger focus on monetizable actions (weather in Denver, followed by booking a flight to Denver).

An uncertain future

It’s impossible to predict where the evolution of search will leave both users and content providers. But one thing that is clear is that as this paradigm shift occurs, the way information is presented will have to change as well. We won’t just want an answer – we’ll want it delivered in the format that best meets our needs. So that could mean video on Facebook and voice delivery on our phones. Content providers will have to become adept at being able to deliver their answers in multiple narratives and formats. Search companies will have to become not just content but knowledge delivery companies as well. Where content providers fit into this new ecosystem and how they will be paid remains to be determined. With voice/conversational interfaces becoming commonplace, Google’s position as the apex of information retrieval might be jeopardized by Siri or Alexa. So while we still may have death and taxes, it’s entirely uncertain if we’re still have Google as we know it now.

Follow Dan Woods on Twitter:

Follow @danwoodsearly

Dan Woods is on a mission to help people find the technology they need to succeed. Users of technology should visit CITO Research, a publication where early adopters find technology that matters. Vendors should visit Evolved Media for advice about how to find the right buyers. See list of Dan's clients on this page.