In the early 1980s, a series of shadowy street paintings — life-size monsters and cowboys — loomed large over the East Village. Anticipating the works of Banksy by more than a decade, the unsigned figures were created under cover of darkness on buildings and bridges. They weren’t mere graffiti, but painterly works reminiscent of Jackson Pollock. Downtown residents buzzed about who could be behind them.

The art world knew who it was: a soft-spoken Canadian — often clad in a cravat and sunglasses — named Richard Hambleton.

At downtown galleries, his mysterious figures fetched thousands of dollars more than work by his friends Jean-Michel Basquiat and Keith Haring. He attended parties with beautiful women on his arm, and Andy Warhol begged him, in vain, to sit for a portrait.

Hambleton canvased Manhattan with some 450 shadow men — and managed to get a few on the Berlin Wall, too. But by the 1990s, he was largely forgotten, living in a drug den on the Lower East Side. He was so poor that he would shoot himself up with heroin, then use the blood in his needle as paint. At some point, he lost half his nose. (He won’t discuss his health, but he has numerous ailments, including skin cancer.)

But lately, Hambleton, 64, has been emerging from his shadowy existence. Hip galleries have begun showing his work again. He’s recognized as the godfather of street art, and his influence can be seen in the works of painters such as Banksy, Blek le Rat and the Brooklyn duo FAILE. And a documentary about his life and work, “Shadowman,” will debut at the Tribeca Film Festival Friday.

Hambleton studied painting in his hometown of Vancouver, British Columbia. In the 1970s, he gained notoriety when he used a public-art grant to paint faux crime scenes — outlines of bodies with blood-red paint — in 15 cities throughout the US and Canada.

He was so poor that he would shoot himself up with heroin, then use the blood in his needle as paint.

“I really began to think I was murdering people,” Hambleton said in the documentary. “Coming back to the hotel room covered in paint — blood-red paint . . . I was told I would never get a grant again.”

It was the first true street art.

“The city is not a blank canvas,” Hambleton told The Post. “It’s a living motion picture that I collaborate with.”

In 1979, he moved to the East Village. His first night, he went to Club 57, where he befriended then-unknown street artist Jean-Michel Basquiat.

Not long after, he began painting his signature shadow men — figures rendered in what looked like black tar — on buildings in NYC’s seediest neighborhoods. Basquiat would draw masks or crowns on them.

Though Hambleton painted in the middle of the night, and never signed his name, the work attracted attention. He and his pals, Basquiat and Haring, quickly became the toast of the art world.

“Every night there would be seven openings,” Hambleton recalled in the documentary. He rubbed shoulders with rapper Fab 5 Freddy, Warhol and punk rocker Richard Hell. Hambleton was frequently photographed with a cigarette in his mouth and a gaggle of girls surrounding him.

“He should have been on the cover of GQ,” Hell said in “Shadowman.”

After parties, the artist would take girls to Tompkins Square Park, where they would paint squirrels black and dodge police. He was also using drugs.

By 1982, he had a successful studio, painting his shadowmen and cowboys, on canvas. His work was commanding $15,000; Basquiat’s fetched $10,000.

Hambleton took his street art to 24 cities in the US and Europe and showed at the 1984 Venice Biennale. Blek le Rat recalled spotting shadow men in Paris. “[They] were a great inspiration,” the now-famous artist told the Independent.

Under the influence of ecstasy, Hambleton began producing landscapes. “They looked like [J.M.W.] Turner paintings; they were sublime,” said Kristine Woodward of Woodward Gallery on the Lower East Side, which works with Hambleton.

It was career suicide. “The art world did not want landscapes . . . they wanted more shadow men,” said “Shadowman” documentarian Oren Jacoby.

So Hambleton dropped out of the scene in the late 1980s. The work of his friends skyrocketed in worth, but the art world lost interest in him. Incredibly, while Basquiat died of a heroin overdose and Haring of AIDS-related complications, neither of those scourges felled Hambleton.

“Basquiat and Haring made a very good career move; they died,” biographer Phoebe Hoban said in “Shadowman.” “After death, the value of their paintings went up.”

BY the 1990s, Hambleton had moved from ecstasy to crack and heroin. He was living in a room on Orchard Street with his girlfriend, as well as a prostitute and a revolving door of junkies. Video footage from the time shows addicts passed out amid art supplies.

Because Hambleton, who didn’t have a job, couldn’t afford paint, he would often instead use the blood caught inside the hypodermic needles he used to inject drugs.

“Richard’s drive to paint, at all costs, is remarkable,” said Jacoby.

He would trade paintings to restaurant owners for meals, and any cash he got was spent on women, drugs and art supplies. If he made a particularly heady sale, he would blow it on caviar from Russ & Daughters.

I know my life isn’t perfect, but I hope the better parts of me are what inspires and not the worst.

It’s unclear if he’s ever stopped using.

But in 2009, Hambleton connected with Vladimir Restoin Roitfeld and Andy Valmorbida, two young art dealers with ties to fashion, who arranged a traveling one-man show sponsored by Armani. His paintings began to reach a new generation.

“Richard’s work made me realize the power of doing work on the street,” said Patrick McNeil, one of the artists behind the Brooklyn art collective FAILE.

Hambleton now lives in a studio in the East Village, and while he doesn’t go out much, his work is thriving. He has a show at the Woodward Gallery through May 5, and in October his art will be featured in a MoMA exhibit about Club 57.

As he told The Post, “I know my life isn’t perfect, but I hope the better parts of me are what inspires and not the worst.”