Mark my words: This is the easy, crowd-pleasing appetizer I will be serving all summer long. Blistered shishito and padron peppers (they're basically interchangeable here) are so much more addictive than you might expect from such a simple dish. It's something about the interplay of crunchy salt, rich oil, and smoky peppers — you can't stop at just one.

Or maybe the addictiveness comes from the fact that you're playing Russian roulette with every bite — there are a few mega-spicy interlopers in every batch of otherwise mellow peppers, but there's no telling which ones.

Buying Shishito or Padron Peppers

You can use either Japanese shishito or Spanish padron peppers for this dish. They look nearly identical and both have a mellow, slightly sweet flavor — except for the occasional spicy surprise! Roughly one pepper in every handful will buck the norm and set your mouth (pleasantly) on fire.

Read The Vegetable Butcher's take on shishito peppers: Your Cast Iron Pan Is Begging for Shishito Peppers

Look for peppers between two inches and five inches long that are bright green and very firm. They are usually available fresh in grocery stores and farmers markets well into the fall, though you can often find packages of shishito peppers at Asian grocery stores year-round. Keep them in a crisper drawer in your fridge until ready to eat; they'll be fine for a few days until you get around to roasting them.

High Heat & Quick Cooking for the Best Peppers

The key to fantastic roasted peppers is high heat and quick cooking. The higher and quicker the better. You're aiming for charred blisters on all sides and a texture that is still fairly firm. Cook the peppers too slowly or at lower heat and they tend to wilt and become too soft before they develop charred spots.

Personally, I prefer roasting the peppers in a scorching hot skillet under the broiler. This way you get simultaneous charring on the top and bottoms, and a lot less smoke. This said, sometimes even turning on the broiler for five minutes of quick cooking is too much during the summer — for those moments, it's the stovetop with the kitchen window wide open to vent smoke.

If you have a grill, by all means use it for roasting peppers! The peppers are so small that they'll fall between the grates, so definitely use a pre-heated grill pan.

Serve Roasted Peppers Right Away

These peppers are best sprinkled with crunchy salt and eaten within minutes of coming off the heat. Even with high heat and quick cooking, they'll wilt and lose their crispiness the longer they sit.

Serve the peppers with a cool, creamy dipping sauce to tame the heat of those few spicy specimens. This Magic Summer Sauce is a favorite; I swap out the yogurt for sour cream or mayo (or a mix) when I want something a little more indulgent.

Heat the skillet: Place a large skillet under the broiler or on the stovetop over high heat to warm.