To some it may seem like you're packing for an extended holiday, but packing a season's worth of clothes and equipment into two bags can be quite a tricky job.

Here's a list to get you started - let us know if there's anything that we've missed out!

Essentials

Warm and waterproof jacket

Trousers/salopettes

Gloves

Goggles

Helmet

Several pairs of good ski socks

Sunglasses

Thermal base layers

Waterproof snow shoes/boots

High SPF suncream and lip balm

Plug adaptors

Chargers

Equipment

Snowboard/Skis and poles

Ski boots/Snowboard boots

Wax/file/guide

Off piste equipment (transceiver, shovel and probe) if planning on going off piste

To make life easier

Travel alarm clock (for those early morning starts)

International enabled mobile / foreign SIM card

Safe box for storing passport/money/important documents

Needle and thread

Fancy dress (let's face it - you're unlikely to get through a season without at least one fancy dress party!)

Laptop / DVDs (unless you're loaded you won't be able to afford going out every night)

Don’t forget Ski Club members enjoy a wide range of discounts with top retailers throughout the UK, both online and on your local high street. Save money with top Ski Club discounts before you head out to resort for the season.

Kit and equipment for your season

Wild Weather

There will be days on the mountain when you'll be happy to have invested in a decent jacket and trousers!



Jacket

If you’re working for a ski company then you’ll probably be provided with a work jacket, but not all companies will let you wear this on the mountain so it’s important to make sure you have a durable waterproof jacket that you can wear in all weather conditions.

Packing tip: Wearing your jacket on the plane will save valuable space in your suitcase for other items.



Trousers

There's nothing fun about learning to snowboard with a wet bum, so make sure you've got a good pair of waterproof snow trousers. In fact, whether you're skiing or snowboarding, novice or expert, this is one piece of absolutely essential kit!



Thermals/Layers

Pack plenty of layers – thermals, t-shirts and hoodies. There’s nothing worse than getting to the top of the mountain and being freezing cold, especially if the weather closes in. Alternatively, if it warms up being able to unzip layers allows you to literally let off some steam. Stay comfortable on the mountain by having a range of thermals and mid-layers.

Packing tip: Pack a combination of long and short sleeve thermals and tops, this will give you the option of mixing and matching depending on the weather.



Goggles

A good set of snow goggles offer improved definition and provide vital protection for your eyes and face in harsh weather. Goggles are great if you're wearing a helmet as they generally fit snug together (though do try before you buy). There are many different sizes and shapes, and many different types of lenses.

For more information on picking the right goggles visit our guide: Choosing the right goggles



Snow shoes

You won't be too far into the season before you realise that trainers and Ugg boots are not the ideal footwear for resort life. They might not be high fashion, but it's well worth investing in a good pair of snow boots/waterproof walking boots.

Packing tip: Buy these in resort, as they’re commonly available and will cost you around £20-£30. This will also save room in your suitcase.



Ski Tests

Our extensive industry-leading Ski Tests can help you pick out the best equipment for your needs.



Ski/snowboard boots

Getting all your kit together for a season can be an expensive process, however if you invest in the right pieces it can make your season a lot easier. If you're going to buy one piece of equipment, it should be boots, after all it’s what you’re going to have on your feet for the majority of the season.

For more information visit our guide: Choosing the right ski boots



Skis/Snowboard

It’s not essential that you take your own skis/snowboard on your season, as there are plenty of hire shops within resort offering seasonnaire rentals. Many seasonnaires are content with what they're given but if you’ve got the money and you’re going to be out there for the whole season then buying a pair of skis/snowboard is worthwhile.

Packing tip: Skis and snowboard add a lot of extra weight to your luggage allowance. If travelling my plane then it’s best to invest in a good quality ski/snowboard bag that can hold your skis/board, boots and selection of clothing.



For more information on picking the right skis check out the latest Ski Tests online.