Frequently Asked Questions

Should you, could you install your own solar electric system?

Over half our customers do install and maintain their own solar power systems. Some hire extra help for part of the installation. Most have an electrician or other professional do the wiring and metering into the house.

So, yes! You can size your system to suit your needs and budget. You can pick the components. And you can install it and maintain it.

There is a team of experienced solar folks here at Wholesale Solar who would love to help you through the process.



Can I build my own solar panels?

You may run into DIY information on the web about building your own solar panels, which we don't really recommend. Leave that to the manufacturers who keep tight control on the safety aspects. But there's lots you can do yourself—from sizing the system, picking components, mounting and installing the solar panels, inverter(s) and safety disconnects. The more you do yourself, the less expensive the whole thing will be.

How big a solar system will I need?

If you have any questions about sizing your system, we can help. Pull a few of your power bills, then call 1-800-472-1142. If you are planning for an off the grid home, look through this load evaluation worksheet before you call.

How much will it cost?

Cost depends on how much electricity you use. To answer that question we need you to answer 3. and 4. in the righthand column then skip to 8. and 9. Call us when you get in over your head. 1-800-472-1142.

Can I self-install a gridtie solar power system?

Many of our gridtie customers do. Gridtie solar is for folks who are already plugged into utility power. Gridtie solar is less complex to install than offgrid and can be easily expanded. Because of utility rebates for gridtie solar systems your installation may be more regulated. Check out the Rules, Regulations and Policies in your state. Plan to have an electrician or licensed contractor do the final hook-up.

Can I self-install an offgrid solar power system?

Of course you can! Offgrid solar power is for independent minded people who want to live exactly where they want to live! Solar power allows you to buy undeveloped land that you can more easily afford. You're probably building your own home, or at least are very involved in the process. You're the perfect candidate for solar DIY!

We (the founders of Wholesale Solar) started off offgrid in northern New Mexico. We built a house and then figured out how to power it with used solar panels. Those panels came from a museum where they were installed during the Jimmy Carter administration (1977 - 1981) and are producing electricity still.