1: Make it custom. Because in this day and age, anything and everything in your closet can be customized. Options range from computerized made-to-measure (i.e., those nifty Web sites that ask you to measure your own shoulders) to full-blown bespoke (i.e., rendered with you in mind from the first stitch). The happiest of mediums comes from Prada: Its made-to-measure program for suits, shirts, et al. is overseen by its team of tailors and craftsmen, who customize the fits and finishes to your liking. In the world according to Prada, the possibilities are practically endless.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

2: It is only when a man doesn't have much to say (parole hearings, pool parties, the priesthood) that his choice of clothing doesn't mean much. With options come obligations, and the more options you've got, the more your choices matter.

3: That hat doesn't look as good as he thinks it does.

Most Popular

4: Appropriate is overrated. Rakish is underrated. On-trend is a compound adjective that one must never utter aloud but is perfectly acceptable to keep in mind.

5: In ascending order of degree of rakishness: double-breasted jacket, driving moccasins, silk bathrobe, captain's hat.

6: Except in the event that you are actually captaining a ship, in which case: appropriate.

7: Chambray shirts are the Bruce Springsteen of men's wear: authentically working-class yet looking a bit more polished and respectable lately.

Cotton shirt ($129) by Tommy Hilfiger; cotton tie ($125) by Billy Reid.

8: Not all blazers are equally versatile.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

From left: Two-button jacket by Massimo Alba ($1,350); One-button jacket by J. Hilburn ($650); Three-button jacket by Billy Reid ($895); Double-breasted jacket by Tommy Hilfiger ($369); and cashmere-and-silk turtleneck sweater ($1,270) by Brunello Cucinelli.

9: The best-dressed group of men on television right now: late-night hosts (see above). The worst dressed: the walking dead on The Walking Dead.

10: The upper-left-hand quadrant of your torso is your sartorial sandbox. Lapel pins, pocket squares, et al. are all toys for the tinkering.

11: The coworker who occasionally changes into a tuxedo before leaving for the evening is not someone you want to have as an enemy.

12: A stiff wind, an arctic clime, ice falling from the sky: such are the conditions that necessitate the looping/knotting/folding of a long fringed scarf around one's neck.

13: Was an overactive office air conditioner or an inflated sense of self among the conditions that necessitate the looping/knotting/folding of a long fringed scarf around one's neck? It was not.

14: Cell phone: not to be seen nor heard nor brandished mid-meeting to check for incoming texts.