Open Source Permaculture: Resources and Vision

Imagine a document. This document has perfect structure, merely looking at the table of contents you can deduce the meaning and function of everything in it. The more you look, the more you understand, it gives you insight into the interconnection of all elements within the document. It is also particularly easy to edit, no part of it is narratively dependent on any other part, it’s not a book, it is not encumbered by continuity of voice, so the freedom to add knowledge at any one point and evolve the entire knowledge structure is far greater.

It is like a wiki, but unlike a wiki, it’s not meant for sheer size of information, but rather, for usability and experience and activity. It’s a knowledge structure that generates meaning and value from the interactions of its elements, and the interactions of the user and the structure itself.

It is also freely downloadable and openly shared, truly open source, not kept online behind sign-ups or as a video series, but a text free to travel the world, free to reach countless communities, acting as a magnetizing center that knowledge gravitates towards, and which generates experience and ecosystems.

Thus it evolves. Through the interactions of humans with its knowledge structure, and humans with the world, and humans with humans, it all cycles back into that open, intelligent structure which becomes more usable the more people use it, and the more people rely on it, its interconnection with the practice of permaculture grows and thus attracts more knowledge and more intelligent refinement.

Otherwise, most or all of these efforts would be, one, less inspired and powerful, not having the knowledge structure of the world at their fingertips, and two, would end up going strictly into personal avenues of use and publishing, which are disconnected from the world and dependent on local economic flows.

Open source permaculture cannot be just this or that design course, it needs to be the work of the community into streamlining and perfecting the available knowledge and process (not of design, but of the actual activity of setting up and maintaining a permaculture ecosystem), of creating a flexible and growth-friendly structure that can absorb, simplify and augment, from the point of view of sheer usefulness, the current information available throughout open source design courses, proprietary design courses, books, online forums and blog posts, and simply the personal experience of various permaculture users and practioners.

All these resources, yes, even the books and open source courses, are currently wasting away to some degree of another, because their degree of accessibility is low from a public point of view, their degree of growth and collaborative editing friendliness is even lower, and their ability to generate communities and ecosystems freely and openly is even lower than that.

Why? because they were evolved apart from the open source credo in most cases, apart from the mentality of gifting the world perfectly usable knowledge, and were actually born of personal economic flows and with a view of profit.

Thus, the actual energy behind them is in most cases very low, and very much tied into lower level processes.

What is a low level process? Something that has low interconnection with the world at large, and low open intelligence.

What is open intelligence? The ability of a text to stand apart from its initiator and provide intelligent value openly, beyond the initial system it was born in. When you take most permaculture books, for example, their open intelligence level is quite low, containing a lot of superfluous narrative, needless details, and in general, being very tied into the particular narrative flow of the author and the way in which he was able to put together a book.

Which was probably far from ideal.

And when you look at permaculture books as a whole, only a small percentage of each book is actual open intelligence, worthy of being taken up and used in an overall intelligent structure of permaculture. The rest is conjecture, social talk, filler narrative, and most of all, things which repeat from book to book, but by virtue of the editorial and publishing process, always remain behind a paywall, and thus never streamlined and done with for good.

The same is true of open source design courses, which are open source in the sense of being free, but not open source in the sense of open intelligence, growth potential, and complete freedom of propagation, as well as proper structure and ease of use in any medium (that is the meaning of highly structured text).

So this is what needs to be done:

An intelligent uptake and structuring of the best available information on permaculture, and a process of making it available in a simple and streamline structure geared towards activity.

Not geared towards design, not geared towards making pretty drawing of permaculture sites, observing and responding to the site and all that other nonsense.

Most permaculture designers are absolutely horrible at actual implementation, and produce designs which lack density in time and space, because they spend too much time drawing things. And because in the real world, actual seed resources and plant propagation resources are far less than imaginary design resources.

When people come together to create open source permaculture, REAL open source permaculture, where it’s not design projects and design fees that depend on the outcome, but real world food, then people will find their own process of activity, and not cling so much to this process of design and seeking approval for designs.

So make a streamlined intelligent structure geared towards activity, perhaps on different levels and modules, in order to have quick uptake for different levels of users.

The immediate activity needs of a 10 year old African are different from those of a highly motivated and empowered man or woman in more fortunate places on the planet, but anyone wishing to PRACTICE permaculture has, first of all, activity needs, and those needs have to be met with a module that is climate appropriate and appropriate for various accomplishment aims.

The key elements of the Open Source Permaculture structure would be:

Different types of target ecosystems. There are several types of form the final working ecosystem can take, and knowing the advantages and difficulties of each is key. This is the actual working form of permaculture. Here modules may be welcome, detailing how various systems behave differently in various climate types — if I am working in northern conditions, or in a desert, I don’t want to have to sift through all the information, but simply download a module for my conditions.

The various types of plants. According to type (tree, bush, etc), according to light/shade needs, according to water needs, growth speed, functions (pioneer, dynamic accumulator, nitrogen fixer and so on), according to resilience, and according to final output of the plant (fruit, nut, etc). This is the one place where modules are essential, according to hardiness zone.

The techniques of permaculture, and how they work to accomplish various things at various times, in order to support certain types of plants in becoming a certain type of ecosystem. Fertility techniques, propagation techniques, planting techniques, food preservation techniques, beneficial plant interactions and pre-set plant systems (companion planting), hugelkultur and so on. This is one place where a great community effort is needed to gather all the techniques and identify the best from the rest, and write up guidelines for best use for the best techniques, which would make ALL THE DIFFERENCE for someone who is just coming into permaculture and doesn’t have years to develop a nose for details. He can develop that nose through winning at permaculture, rather than winning at browsing online forums and listening to weeklong seminars trying to pick up a few gems. Technique is technique, and it needs to be best, this is one of the places where open source permaculture will truly shine.

Activity guides. How to actually implement a certain final system, using techniques and plants. Where to use a certain type of pioneer, what kind of plant structures to use, what kind of density and succession to encourage, and so on. This is the place where the most intelligence and creativity are required, and as such, the place where this work is most needed. At first this seems like the magical zone of artistic creation, AND IT IS, but precisely because it is so essential and in many ways difficult for some people, precise guides to activity and winning implementation are needed. They may not lead to the absolute perfect result in any conditions, but they will lead to good results for all people. And that is the goal of open source permaculture, not having to go through years of learning the various pitfalls and needless complexities and overconceptualization of various writers and ‘designers’, of varying degrees of intelligence, but simply having intelligent and creative modules that anyone can implement. Don’t worry, the best will go far beyond that and do far more, and then share it back into the community and everything will grow, but this is not per se about the best, it’s about those who for one reason or another do not have the resources of qualities to accomplish the absolute best, BUT STILL NEED FOOD, and need the opportunity to work and benefit other beings through nature.

INCREASE INTELLIGENCE. INCREASE OPENESS. INCREASE STRUCTURE. INCREASE CONNECTION.

SIMPLIFY EVERYTHING AND GET THE DESIGN OBSESSION OUT OF PERMACULTURE. IT CONSUMES RESOURCES AND KEEPS PEOPLE STUCK IN LONG LEARNING CYCLES THAT ARE INAUSPICIOUS AND DO NOT RESULT IN ACTIVITY.

MAKE PERMACULTURE HUMAN AGAIN.

Before I move on to the (ever-evolving) list of open resources, remember one thing. Do not hesitate to open source knowledge from books. It’s not proprietary. Nobody owns the world. It’s there to be used for the welfare and benefit for your human brothers and sisters, not to be locked away inside a book. Anything that’s good, take it nicely, laugh, edit it and make it better, and benefit the world with it.

My listing of these resources is not a way of advocating for a particular resource or author.

It is support openly given to all those looking for open permaculture, and support given to all those who were open and giving and intelligent enough to provide these resources.

That being said, I wish to truly thank all the people who have provided open resources, all the people who are willing to benefit from them and help others, making the world a better place, and all the people who look upon nature as refuge and inspiration, and thus gain the qualities required to be truly present for others.

Tree Crops: A Permanent Agriculture

http://www.fastonline.org/CD3WD_40/JF/419/08-302.pdf

Available online, this is the second edition, updated, and the copyright to it is expired. This is the book that inspired much of permaculture, and is still the reference when it comes to tree agriculture.

Treeyo Permaculture

https://treeyopermacultureedu.wordpress.com/

This is the only truly open source permaculture course available online. Freely given, openly published, the structure available online for all to see, this is a PDC available as a blog.

Permaculture International College

http://permaculturecollege.eu/about/core-curriculum/

Permaculture Design Course Handbook by Robyn Francis. The course is intended for Certificate III & IV in Horticulture in the Australian education system, comparable to EQF 4 and 5 in Europe. It lays the foundations for permaculture design philosophy and competencies in design work and teaching at the level of designers and teachers in training, working under tutelage of experienced colleagues. It forms the basis for further education and growth in competencies and proficiency of a two year diploma pathway in many European permaculture education systems.

Soil and Health Library

http://soilandhealth.org/agricultural-library-sort-by-subject/

This is an amazing resource of old copyright free books. There are, for example, some great russian books (in english) on plant structure and microbial effects and all sorts of topics which you’d have a hard time finding in popular books today. However, it is quite a large time investment to read them.

Plants For A Future

http://pfaf.org/

PFAF provides the most comprehensive and usable permaculture plant database online. Almost everything is in there, tested and detailed. It is a glorious resource.

There is also Practical Plants, which is a dynamic database working with a lot of data from Plants for a Future

http://practicalplants.org/wiki/Practical_Plants

Eric Toensmeier

Perennial Vegetable Lists by Climate

http://perennialvegetables.org/perennial-vegetables-for-each-climate-type/

Perennial Farming Systems, great primer on perennial crops.

http://www.perennialsolutions.org/perennial-farming-systems-organic-agriculture-edible-permaculture-eric-toensmeier-large-scale-farmland.html

Plant and Seed Resources

http://www.perennialsolutions.org/perennial-plant-seed-sources-catalogs-stores-permaculture-varieties-hardy-hybrids-organic-gardening.html

Plant Profiles

http://www.perennialsolutions.org/useful-perennial-plant-profiles-hardy-organic-gardening-plants-permaculture-urban-resource-garden.html

Thank you Kevin Swanson for the suggestion :

You should include the Apiosinstitue wiki on this page. It is a wiki for sharing/collaborating on polycultures/guilds. At first glance you may think that you have to pay for a membership but you don’t as long as you pledge to contribute content, see the details here:

http://apiosinstitute.org/get-full-access-wiki-content

Permaculture Wikis

Besides the Apioinstitue Wiki mentioned above, which is a fast growing resource, we also have these wikis:

The Permaculture Wiki

http://permaculture.wikia.com/wiki/Permaculture_Wiki

The Permaculture Knowledge Base

https://knowledgebase.permaculture.org.uk/

Permaground — The Free and OpenSource Permaculture Manual that you can enrich

http://permaground.wikispaces.com/

Permaculture Source Wiki

http://permaculturesource.wikispaces.com/

The Food and Agriculture part of Appropedia

http://www.appropedia.org/Portal:Food_and_agriculture

Bill Mollison Videos and Books

Bill Mollison needs no introduction, he started Permaculture and infused it with the right spirit, and to this day the true open permaculture spirit can be best found in his works.

72 hour video course by Bill Mollison

http://www.networkearth.org/perma/culture.html#Permaculture

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL6S83Kg2Lr9SjIMs16NW5PaZ62aV3gw_M

Introduction to Permaculture Book

http://tcpermaculture.com/docs/Introduction%20to%20Permaculture-Mollison.pdf

Permaculture Two Book

http://library.uniteddiversity.coop/Permaculture/Bill_Mollison-Permaculture_Two-Practical_Design_for_Town_and_Country_in_Permanent_Agriculture.pdf

Jack Spirko

A good no-nonsense overview of permaculture and video PDC course with lots of applied details.

https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=bgRwtMGcNe4&list=PLEA7BA330871366B8

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL9541F1A9B5139F98

Three playlists “describing the different aspects of permaculture practices and showing the practical applications here at DAcres”

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLE4B73E083511F4B4

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLu_7bTtHBXeS_ngpe03DrEXnie9V_o1eF

https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLu_7bTtHBXeRsh34OVEjNIpbL0Rqi1nFo

Will Hooker

https://youtu.be/w0HNBxIdvqg?list=PLLdOf6Px4qoraTEKu8WXF2Vqg1wjKYDos

North Carolina State University has a 72 hour Introduction to Permaculture with instructor Will Hooker. It takes place in a classroom, with videoed field trips, and it’s meant for their ‘Distant Education’ students, but available openly.

Will Hooker’s home garden is on the front cover of Toby Hemenway’s “Gaia’s Garden”.

It doesn’t involve the design exercise required for “officially” completing a PDC course.

https://distance.ncsu.edu/courses/course-details.php?id=HS:432::601:SPRG:2012

https://mediasite.online.ncsu.edu/online/Catalog/Full/f5a893e74b7c4b7980fd52dcd1ced71521

https://courses.ncsu.edu/hs432/common/podcasts/

GS

http://www.green-shopping.co.uk/ebooks/free-ebooks.html

Great free books on several permaculture topics

101 Permaculture Designs, downloadable image album

http://imgur.com/a/aTPS8

Thanks go to AutumnLeavesCascade for compiling the album.

Open Permaculture Dot Com

https://www.openpermaculture.com/ $26k were raised to make this course free, but it’s not really open, since you need to sign up for it. And a few quotes from the permies.com forums indicate that:

“I signed up for it but I could barely hear the instructor so I stopped watching the videos and decided to focus my efforts on reading books…”

“The RLI course is painful to slog through.”

“Yes, the course is free, but the quality of the production is sub par, and really not worth the time, and I love this stuff.”