Dr. Josh Axe and Eric Zielinski

January 27, 2014

July 19, 2017

There is a common belief today about cavities that once you have tooth decay, that cavity can NOT be reversed. Then the only solution to oral wellness is to have part of your tooth drilled out and filled with a synthetic material. However, it’s been proven that there are ways to reverse cavities naturally.

In fact, according to a study published in the British Medical Journal, cavities and tooth decay could potentially be reversed with diet. (1)

A study was performed on 62 children with cavities, and they were divided into three different diet groups. Group 1 ate a standard diet plus oatmeal (rich in phytic acid). Group 2 consumed a normal diet and supplemented with vitamin D. Group 3 ate a grain-free diet and took vitamin D.

The results found that Group 1 who had a diet high in grains and phytic acid had an increase in cavities. Group 2 had improvements in cavities and less form. Group 3, who followed a grain-free diet with nutrient-rich foods like vegetables, fruits, meat, milk and took vitamin D, saw the greatest improvements — nearly all cavities were healed. (2)

This study, along with the backing of many doctors and dentists, proves we have been misinformed about what causes cavities and how to reverse cavities naturally.

Dentist Ramiel Nagel, who authored the book “Cure Tooth Decay,” has helped many of his patients “reverse” their tooth decay and would rather not put in dangerous amalgam fillings. He believes that you can prevent cavities with nutrient-rich foods.

In this article, I am going to go over the causes of tooth decay and how it may be prevented and in many cases even reversed.

The Cause of Tooth Decay

To understand the link between diet and oral wellness, we must start with one of the most well-respected dentists who ever lived, Weston A. Price.

West A. Price lived in the early 1900s and was the chairman of the National Dental Association (1914–1923) and a pioneer for the American Dental Association (ADA).

Weston Price traveled the world searching to discover what causes tooth decay. Dr. Price found a common link between eating modern foods and cavities. He witnessed that many indigenous isolated tribes had perfect teeth and little tooth decay. But once they were exposed to a Western diet, they experienced tooth decay, bone loss and chronic illness.

According to the ADA, this is the cause of tooth decay:

“[Tooth decay] occurs when foods containing carbohydrates (sugars and starches) such as milk, pop, raisins, cakes or candy are frequently left on the teeth. Bacteria that live in the mouth thrive on these foods, producing acids as a result. Over a period of time, these acids destroy tooth enamel, resulting in tooth decay.”

But the truth is the ADA is only hitting on one of the four things that can contribute to tooth decay.

According to the insights of Dr. Edward Mellanby, Dr. Weston Price and Ramiel Nagel, there are four main things that contribute to tooth decay: (3)

Lack of minerals in the diet ( calcium deficiency magnesium deficiency Lack of fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K, especially vitamin D deficiency Too much consumption of phytic acid-rich foods Too much consumption of processed sugar

Let’s discuss the four aspects that cause tooth decay and how they can be addressed with diet, along with ways to reverse cavities naturally.

Today and tomorrow, I’m hosting a free presentation all about what I’ve created to be the fastest and most authoritative way to become a Certified Essential Oil Coach.

And you’re invited! Click Here to Register

Whether you’re in pursuit of essential oil mastery or you want to build an essential oil business, this is a must-see presentation. Plus, I’ve set aside a half hour to answer your questions.

Like I said, no charge and you can register here.

How to Reverse Cavities Naturally

Don’t be fooled, in addition to brushing and flossing daily, there are several ways you can reverse cavities naturally and maximize your oral health without resorting to taking in fluoride. Here are just a few ways to reverse cavities naturally for you to consider, while also avoiding fluoride:

1. Remove Sugar

Probably the worst culprit of them all for anyone who desires healthy, cavity-free teeth, sugar should be avoided like the plague. So kick that sugar addiction stat. Not only does sugar feed oral bacteria that prevents a healthy flow of dental fluids, but it’s highly acidic and can literally decalcify or demineralize the structural content of teeth that create dental decay. (4)

This means staying away from soda, candy and baked goods with sugar. Additionally, use raw honey and maple syrup, and drink juices sparingly, as too much sugar can contribute to cavity formation. Be careful of artificial sweeteners because of their health risks as well. Bottom line: Make stevia your new best friend along with raw honey in moderation!

2. Eliminate Phytic Acid

Phytic acid (phytate) is a mineral blocker and enzyme inhibitor found in grains, nuts, seeds and beans that can cause serious health problems in our diets. The main reason phytic acid has become an issue today is because we have stopped ancient food preparation techniques, such as sprouting or sourdough fermentation, which kills off the phytic acid.

According to research published in the The Lancet, a diet high in phytic acid creates mineral deficiencies and causes osteoporosis. About 80 percent of phosphorus in grains and beans is bound to phytic acid so it’s completely unabsorbable. In addition to blocking phosphorus availability in humans, these molecules bind minerals necessary for oral health, such as calcium, magnesium, iron and zinc — thus causing them to be unavailable for proper utilization. Consuming foods high in phytic acid decreases magnesium absorption by 60 percent and zinc by 20 percent. (5)

Phytic acid not only prevents you from absorbing minerals in your food, but it also leaches minerals out of your body, bones and teeth! (6)

Subsequently, the powerful anti-nutritional effects of phytic acid have been known to cause digestive disorders, lack of appetite, nutrient deficiencies and tooth decay. A good rule of thumb is to limit your grain consumption and stay completely clear from unfermented soy products. (7)

Because phytic acid is much higher in foods grown using modern high-phosphate fertilizers than those grown in natural compost, try to only eat foods that are organic and GMO-free. If you’re aiming to improve your health and reverse cavities naturally, foods high in phytic acid like grains, beans, nuts and soy should be avoided. However, if you soak grains or nuts and then sprout them or do sourdough fermentation, you can reduce phytic acid by around 50 percent to 100 percent. (8)

3. Consume Raw Dairy and Nutrient-Rich Foods

Raw dairy is filled with the vitamins and minerals that contribute to a healthy dental fluid flow and help maintain strong teeth and promote oral wellness. Thus, it’s a great way to get cavity-free teeth. Loaded with calcium, vitamin K2, vitamin D3, magnesium, phosphorus and fat-soluble vitamins, it’s a good idea to consume raw dairy products at least weekly. I recommend goat milk kefir, raw cheeses and organic grass-fed butter as great options.

Remember, if you’re going to beat tooth decay, you need to increase your fat-soluble vitamin intake and mineral intake. If I were creating an ideal diet to follow, it would look like this:

Rich in animal foods like bone broth

Raw and cooked vegetables, especially green leafy vegetables.

Raw dairy like kefir, cheese and grass-fed butter.

Fruit, one piece daily early in day.

Vitamin D — get plenty of sunshine, and days not in sun supplement with 5,000IU daily of D3.

Foods high in healthy fats cod liver oil

Fermented grains only and in moderation, such as true sourdough bread (or even better no grains at all). You can buy raw flours and breads.

Nuts, seeds and beans only that have been sprouted.

Finally, NO processed foods

4. Use Mineralizing Toothpaste

First of all, I know it can get expensive, but there are several brands of fluoride-free toothpaste that you won’t have to pay a small fortune to get your hands on. Second, if you’re looking to save a buck or two and also want to remineralize your teeth in a particularly powerful way, try making your own Homemade Remineralizing Toothpaste:

4 tablespoons coconut oil

2 tablespoons baking soda (aluminum-free)

1 tablespoon xylitol

20 drops peppermint or clove essential oil

20 drops trace minerals or (calcium/magnesium powder)

5. Try Oil Pulling

Used for centuries by Ayurvedic medicine, oil pulling is a fantastic oral detoxification procedure that has gained some popularity in the U.S. the last several years. Simply done by swishing a tablespoon of oil in your mouth for 20 minutes, this simple oral detoxification procedure has been praised to cure everything from gingivitis to headaches to systemic diseases like diabetes.

If you can’t do 20 minutes, three to five minutes is still good. I recommend using coconut oil or MCT oil and a drop or two of clove and/or tea tree essential oils for maximal antiseptic and antifungal power. Here are some tips:

The best time to oil pull (like most other detoxification procedures) is first thing in the morning right after you get out of bed.

Don’t let the 20-minute time frame deter you. You won’t even notice 20 minutes have gone by if you do this during your normal morning routine (i.e., while you shower, put your clothes on and prep for the day).

I then recommend that you spit the spent oil in the trash rather than into the sink, as an accumulation of oil could pose problems for household plumbing down the road.

Immediately afterward, rinse your mouth out with warm water. Use salt water for added antimicrobial properties.

Don’t be shocked if the oil/saliva mixture you spit out is milky white or yellow.

Finally, brush your teeth as normal.

Note: This should be a relatively relaxing process, so don’t feel compelled to vigorously swish your mouth with oil for the entire time or else you’re bound to get sore jaw muscles. Simply and gently move the oil in your mouth and through your teeth without swallowing any of it.

Takeaways on How to Reverse Cavities Naturally

According to the insights of Dr. Edward Mellanby, Dr. Weston Price and Ramiel Nagel, there are four main things that contribute to tooth decay: lack of minerals in the diet (calcium deficiency, magnesium deficiency and phosphorus deficiency); lack of fat soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K, especially vitamin D deficiency); too much consumption of phytic acid-rich foods; and too much consumption of processed sugar.

You can reverse cavities naturally by removing sugar, eliminating phytic acid, consuming raw dairy and nutrient-rich foods, using mineralizing toothpaste, and try oil pulling.

In a nutshell, these are the best ways to naturally reverse cavities. Take charge of your oral wellness today, and show off your new, healthy smile with pride!