Anyone can buy systems that hide small motors and batteries inside bikes. Marketed as a way to help older or infirm people keep cycling, most of the systems power the axle that joins the two crank arms of the bike and are outwardly invisible, with on-off switches hidden under handlebar tape. Newer, even smaller motor systems can slip into the rear hub to boost the bike from there.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For its report, Stade 2 positioned a thermal imaging camera along the route of the Strade Bianche, an Italian professional men’s race in March held mostly on unpaved roads and featuring many steep climbs. The rear hub of one bicycle glowed with almost the same vivid orange-yellow thermal imprint of the riders’ legs. Engineers and antidoping experts interviewed by the TV program said the pattern could be explained only by heat generated by a motor. The rider was not named by the program and could not be identified from the thermal image.

The program also used the camera at a gran fondo, an amateur and semiprofessional event, in Italy. At least one bike showed a suspicious heat pattern around its cranks.

Photo

Corriere della Sera, an Italian newspaper that collaborated with the French program, reported that the thermal camera found signs of motors in seven bikes used in the Strade Bianche and at the Coppi and Bartali, another Italian race.

Cycling’s equivalents of the Zapruder film are online videos that show unusual patterns of bike changes that precede or follow exceptional bursts of speed by riders. Other videos analyze riders’ hand movements for signs of switching on motors. Still other online analysts pore over crashes, looking for bikes on which the cranks keep turning after separation from the rider.

Unlike the thermal images, however, the videos have only implied that a motor was present.

In a statement, the cycling union, which commonly goes by its French initials, U.C.I., said it had tested and rejected thermal imaging.

“The U.C.I. has been testing for technological fraud for many years, and with the objective of increasing the efficiency of these tests, we have been trialling new methods of detection over the last year,” the governing body said. “We have looked at thermal imaging, X-ray and ultrasonic testing, but by far the most cost-effective, reliable and accurate method has proved to be magnetic resonance testing using software we have created in partnership with a company of specialist developers.”

Photo

Its system uses a device attached to a tablet computer that sends out a magnetic field. Bikes that create unusual disruptions of that field are then pulled for physical inspection.

About 2,000 bikes have been scanned this year, although no inspection took place at the Strade Bianche.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The magnetic resonance device was responsible for the world’s first confirmed mechanical doping case. At the under-23 women’s event at the world cyclocross championships in late January, it showed a suspicious pattern in a bike belonging to Femke Van den Driessche. A subsequent physical inspection found a motor and battery.

After initially claiming that the bike no longer belonged to her, Van den Driessche, 19, abandoned her defense just before a disciplinary hearing opened and quit cycling.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Sports Newsletter Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Earlier in the decade, it was widely believed that motorized cheaters used a system from Austria now called Viv a x Assist. But because that system’s device is comparatively heavy and noisy, the general assumption now is that cyclists turn to Stefano Varjas, a Hungarian who demonstrated his products to Stade 2.

In an interview on Monday, Varjas said that his crank-assist devices could produce more than 250 watts, the amount of power a professional rider might typically average during a four-hour race. The smaller hub-assist motors, which he makes only for custom orders, typically produce only about 25 watts, he said, and require the rider to be able to maintain a high pedaling rate as is the case with all professionals. Even a 25-watt boost would be significant during a professional race.

Varjas said his system was nearly silent and light enough to keep a bike at the cycling union’s minimum weight.

“If you have this system, you can stay with the group, but nobody hears it, nobody sees it, nobody knows about it,” he said of the devices, which cost 10,000 to 25,000 euros (about $11,300 to about $28,200), depending on features.

While Varjas said that some professionals and teams used the motors for training — sometimes as a substitute for pacing at high speeds behind a motorcycle — he said that he did not know if the motors were also used in races for cheating. But he added that he believed that some kinds of carbon fiber, the material used to make pro bikes, could render the technology invisible to the cycling union’s new screening devices.

Varjas said that many of his customers who merely relied on the device to keep cycling were reluctant to offer endorsements.

“It’s a very strange market,” Varjas said. “No one will say they have this kind of bike.”