But look who has won three of the four Grand Slam singles titles again this season, losing only in the French Open final. Look who has a record total of more than 16,000 points in the computer rankings, the most since a new point scale was put into place in 2009. And look who has clinched the year-end No. 1 ranking in mid-September.

“I go through a lot of emotions on the court, like anybody else,” Djokovic said. “I just think, over the time, I’ve managed to learn how to use the experience and how to handle and cope with this pressure in tough moments. But I also think a lot comes from my character and from the fact that I grew up in circumstances which were not very ordinary and maybe not the circumstances that most of the guys grew up in. They have shaped me and my character, and those memories give me that bit of strength that I use in occasions like the one last night.”

To a neutral observer, it was an extraordinary situation, with the New York crowd more interventionist than even the crowd at the Wimbledon final in 2013, which succeeded in helping Andy Murray end a 77-year drought for British men at the All England Club by beating Djokovic.

But Djokovic, well accustomed to playing the villain to Federer’s white knight, said he was not a bit surprised by the dynamic.

“I came out on the court knowing what to expect,” he said. “I was ready for it mentally, and I think that has helped me keep my cool in the toughest moments.”

Djokovic looked more relaxed on Monday morning as he shuttled from television studio to television studio. His voice was hoarse, his hedgehog hair slightly mussed and his right wrist and forearm scraped after a fall he took in the first set.

The first part of the interview was conducted in the back seat of an Open van; the second part occurred during a walk through Central Park en route to a photo shoot.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It was hardly his first September stroll there. After staying in a private home in Alpine, N.J., during the last several Opens, Djokovic and his family decided to return to a Manhattan hotel.

“One of my close friends said, which I think is right, is that this city has so much energy going on that if you stay in the city for a certain amount of time, it gives you a lot of energy,” Djokovic said. “But if you stay for too long, it can take your energy.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Djokovic will return to Monaco with 10 Grand Slam singles titles in hand, trailing Nadal (14) and Federer (17). No three men’s tennis contemporaries have managed this until now — in part because in the game’s amateur era many of the elite soon turned professional, thus becoming ineligible for Grand Slam play.

But the Open era, which began in 1968, has lasted nearly 50 years. By any measure, the current period is an exceptional one, with Djokovic, Nadal and Federer all searching for trump cards: from Djokovic’s gluten-free diet in 2011 to the cutting-edge return referred to as SABR (Sneak Attack by Roger) that Federer had used to great effect over the last month, but not to such smashing success on Sunday against Djokovic’s lobs.

Clearly resistant to SABR’s charms, but not openly critical, Djokovic appears to have figured out long ago that taking shots at Federer rarely gets you anywhere. Best to extol his evident virtues and beat him when it matters most.

Djokovic has won their last three major matches: the 2014 and 2015 Wimbledon finals and this Open final.

Surpassing Federer’s record total of 17 majors once seemed implausible, but at this stage, it simply seems daunting.

“I would not be truthful to you if I would say I’m not thinking about it,” Djokovic said. “Of course I am.”

At 28, does Djokovic still have enough time?

“If I keep taking care of my body and have this kind of a mind-set where I keep the same lifestyle, I think it will give me longevity, and if it gives me longevity, I think I have a fair chance to fight for a few more Grand Slams,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Djokovic can see himself playing, like Federer or Serena Williams, into his mid-30s. “It’s kind of a game to me now, kind of a quest, seeing how far I can go,” he said.

The walk in the park was coming to an end, and the phalanx of photographers waiting for Djokovic by the rocks overlooking Wollman Rink was coming into view. Time for one last query:

What would it take for a Grand Slam crowd to support him the way it supported Federer on Sunday?

Djokovic thought for a moment, then answered — as is his way — in paragraphs, not a sentence or two.

“Honestly, I think, first of all, it’s about enduring,” he said. “True tennis fans respect somebody that shows commitment to the sport — not just shows results, but shows his passion for tennis and respects them, the tournaments, the opponents and the sport in general. I think it’s also about what you represent. Are you respecting the true life’s values, and are you a man of conscience that plays tennis but also gives back?

“I think the whole package is important. That’s what I try to do. It’s how I’ve been brought up, and I hope the crowd recognizes that. But in the circumstances, when I’m playing against Roger at this point, I cannot expect something else.”

Last question navigated, Djokovic stepped onto the rocks with the Manhattan skyline behind him and the Open trophy back in his hands.

Tourists, caught by surprise by the apparition, rushed with their smartphones to join the professionals. As they pressed forward, leaves rustled nearby in the breeze. There was a slight morning chill. Another summer is almost over, but Djokovic is still No. 1, still very much in his prime.