On Sunday, Mr. Rosenstein sought to clarify Mr. Sessions’s position.

“The attorney general has been very clear that we’re after the leakers, not the journalist,” Mr. Rosenstein said on Fox. “We’re after the people who are committing crimes.”

But Mr. Rosenstein also called concerns over press freedom an “overreaction” and reiterated a statement Mr. Sessions made on Friday, when the attorney general said reporters could not expect “unlimited” leeway in handling leaked material.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“They cannot place lives at risk with impunity,” Mr. Sessions said on Friday.

The briefing on Friday ended with Mr. Sessions and Mr. Rosenstein ignoring shouted questions about whether they would include members of the news media in their leak investigations. Mr. Rosenstein’s statement that he would not comment on “hypotheticals” came in a later briefing on Friday.

On Sunday, Mr. Rosenstein left open the possibility that reporters could carry some legal responsibility for information published, but said the department had not revised any policy on reporters.

“Generally speaking, reporters who publish information are not committing a crime. But there might be a circumstance where they do,” Mr. Rosenstein said on Fox. “I haven’t seen any of those today, but I wouldn’t rule it out in the event that there were a case where a reporter was purposely violating the law.”

For months, the White House, battling persistent leaks, had been pushing the Justice Department to crack down. After a series of posts on Twitter last month ridiculing Mr. Sessions, President Trump tweeted his approval of the increase in leak investigations.

“After many years of LEAKS going on in Washington, it is great to see the A.G. taking action!” Mr. Trump wrote on Saturday.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The anxiety over leaks has partly been a reaction to the investigation by Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel examining Russian meddling in last year’s election. News reports about the special counsel have drawn the ire of White House staff members, and on Sunday, Kellyanne Conway, the president’s counselor, called news of grand-jury-issued subpoenas related to the investigation a “leak.”

“These are supposed to be done in secret,” Ms. Conway said on ABC’s “This Week.” “And yet that leaked out, as so many things do that are harmful to our security interest.”

Mr. Rosenstein also addressed that investigation on Sunday, saying that Mr. Mueller needed his approval to further the inquiry’s reach.

“If he finds evidence of a crime that’s within the scope of what Director Mueller and I have agreed is the appropriate scope of the investigation, then he can” pursue it, Mr. Rosenstein said on Fox. “If it’s something that’s outside that scope, he needs to come to the acting attorney general — at this time, me — for a permission to expand his investigation.”