Photo by Andrew Malone

Here is a question that has plagued me for most of my driving life: How far into the intersection should you pull when waiting to make a left-hand turn against oncoming traffic?



To get some clarity, I spoke to Sam Schwartz, also known as “Gridlock Sam,” a transportation engineer who was New York City’s traffic commissioner in the 1980s.



Advertisement

Turns out, at least in New York City, it’s not illegal to enter the intersection on a green or amber light. But it is illegal to get stuck there.



So exactly how far into the intersection should you pull for maximum safety, efficiency, and to increase your chances of getting out?

The answer: X marks the spot.

Schwartz says, “Imagine two diagonals from the four corners, where the two diagonals meet. The front of your vehicle should not go beyond that meeting point.”



Advertisement

If you go too far, “the cars turning opposite you, instead of being to your right, are to your left, and you’ll cross each other. The most efficient way is to not cross the opposing direction of traffic.”



And if you don’t go far enough, you block people trying to get past on foot: “What happens too often is people end up blocking a crosswalk—and New York pedestrians are an angry lot. They’re likely to kick your car. So try not to do that.”



When can you enter?

You’re good entering the intersection on green or yellow. “You can enter the intersection until the red signal. You can enter on amber, and if it changes to red while you’re in the intersection, you’re allowed to continue through.”

But don’t get stuck.

Schwartz tells me: “There is a caveat to that. I just came back from Seattle, and I noticed how good people were about not entering an intersection if there wasn’t room on the opposing side. It’s the same thing in New York—there’s a law on the books that if there’s no room in the accepting street, you cannot enter the intersection. It’s called spillback if you do—if you enter and you get stuck.”

Googling various states’ laws is an interesting rabbit hole: Take this Quora question, for example, which appears to confirm Schwartz’s statement: You can enter the intersection, but you can’t remain there once the light turns red. A reporter for the Bellingham Herald tackles the laws in Washington, which seem to indicate that one can’t pull into an intersection unless there is already a clear path through. But he notes that “there are other places in the country where either law or culture creates an expectation that drivers will pull into the intersection, even if there is no visible chance for a left turn.”

This discussion of Michigan’s laws indicates that motorists may pull past the crosswalk to wait for traffic to clear. And in Montana, Captain Arthur Collins of the Montana Highway Patrol said in an email, “This is a good question. You can enter the intersection on a green or yellow light to make a left turn. However, you may not block the intersection once the light changes. Personally, I will not enter the intersection on the green or yellow light unless I’m the first one in the intersection. This way I know I can clear the intersection as soon as oncoming traffic stops for the red light.” His take on other states? “As far as the rest of the country goes, most traffic laws are pretty standard across the nation. Enforcement, however, may not be standard.”

Good point. So, what’s a cautious driver to do, especially one who’s a multi-state motorist? In Montana, I’d probably wait. Home in NYC, I pull into the intersection, because if I didn’t I’d still be sitting there. As in all things traffic, study up on your local laws, and use your best judgement.