Information On Cancer Astrology

Cancer Zodiac Sign Cancer Horoscope

Element: Water

Quality: Cardinal

Color: White

Day: Monday, Thursday

Ruler: Moon

Greatest Overall Compatibility: Capricorn, Taurus

Lucky Numbers: 2, 3, 15, 20

Date range: June 21 - July 22

Cancer traits

Strengths: Tenacious, highly imaginative, loyal, emotional, sympathetic, persuasive

Weaknesses: Moody, pessimistic, suspicious, manipulative, insecure

Cancer likes: Art, home-based hobbies, relaxing near or in water, helping loved ones, a good meal with friends

Cancer dislikes: Strangers, any criticism of Mom, revealing of personal life

Deeply intuitive and sentimental, Cancer can be one of the most challenging zodiac signs to get to know. They are very emotional and sensitive, and care deeply about matters of the family and their home. Cancer is sympathetic and attached to people they keep close. Those born with their Sun in Cancer are very loyal and able to empathize with other people's pain and suffering.

The sign of Cancer belongs to the element of Water, just like Scorpio and Pisces. Guided by emotion and their heart, they could have a hard time blending into the world around them. Being ruled by the Moon, phases of the lunar cycle deepen their internal mysteries and create fleeting emotional patterns that are beyond their control. As children, they don't have enough coping and defensive mechanisms for the outer world, and have to be approached with care and understanding, for that is what they give in return.

Lack of patience or even love will manifest through mood swings later in life, and even selfishness, self-pity or manipulation. They are quick to help others, just as they are quick to avoid conflict, and rarely benefit from close combat of any kind, always choosing to hit someone stronger, bigger, or more powerful than they imagined. When at peace with their life choices, Cancer representatives will be happy and content to be surrounded by a loving family and harmony in their home.

Cancer - the Brave Crab Sent to this Earth by something they believe in, only to mess with someone bigger than they are, this isn't an animal aware of their strength. Patriotism can make them endanger their own wellbeing, fighting for someone else's cause, as if others can become their higher power. The Crab knows where they're going, but this is often in a wrong direction, at least until they learn their lessons and start relying solely on themselves.

Yesterday Today This Week This Month More Horoscopes Cancer Horoscope: Yesterday Thinking about someone important for your heart, you might feel sad because things are not developing as you’d like them to. It won’t be easy to accept the pull of reality away from your emotional needs, but it is possible ... Continue to Cancer Yesterday Horoscope Cancer Horoscope: Today You have someone to think about and can’t make the choices you would choose to make with this person out of the picture. There is a reason for certain limitations and boundaries. Don’t break walls trying to touch something that ... Continue to Cancer Daily Horoscope Cancer Horoscope: This Week This is a week that leads towards liberation and personal freedom, and some negative emotions at its beginning might have a sole purpose of taking you there. Although you would like to hold on to a certain sense of security, ... Continue to Cancer Weeky Horoscope Cancer Horoscope: This Month The entire flow of this month leads from ties to liberation and it might be an uneasy time if you have held on for certain things for too long and way past their expiration date. Some images will have to ... Continue to Cancer Monthly Horoscope

Cancer Love and Sex

Cancer is a very emotional sign, and feelings are the most important thing in their relationships. Gentle and caring, they will show their sensibility to the world without even thinking they might get hurt. For partners, they always choose a person who is able to understand them through non-verbal, silent contact, and a shared daily routine, and their affection won't last long with superficial, flaky or unreliable partners. The lack of initiative these individuals suffer from won't make it easy for them to build a sex life they wish for, if they don't find a partner who is able to make them feel calm, protected, and free to express.

This is a dedicated sign, ready to make many unhealthy compromises only to keep their image of a family going, and could choose partners who are in a way selfish of abusive. Shared responsibility and a life together with their partner makes them feel secure and ready for the next step in life, no matter if it is a child, a new job, or simply a cleanup in the field of friendships and relationships that became obsolete or hurtful. In love with children, parenthood, marriage and traditional values, they can still be misguided by people they admire and trust into changing their honest approach to a modern one that doesn't fit their true personality.

Compassion and understanding that a Cancer chose to send your way shouldn't ever be taken for granted, or they will show you just how bad of a match you two are in the long run. For now, you can check cancer-born compatibility by matching the signs here:

Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces + Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Match

Cancer Friends and Family

Friends - When it comes to friendships, Cancer representatives will gladly connect with new social contacts, but are extremely sensitive of people not approved by their closest surrounding. Filled with respect for people they communicate to easily, they see all contacts through their emotional prism rather than simple curiosity or status. Most of all they enjoy socializing at home, where intimate atmosphere can be made and deep understanding shared in circumstances under their control. Intuitive and compassionate, they are sometimes impossible to understand from an extremely rational point of view.

Family - Cancer is the sign of family and these individuals care about family bonds and their home more than any other sign of the zodiac. Deeply sentimental, they tend to diligently preserve family memories, keeping them intact for years. When their personal lives are fulfilled, they make wonderful, caring parents that seem to know how they children feel even when they are miles apart.

Cancer Career and Money

When a job needs to get done, a Cancer will roll their sleeves up and finish it successfully. If they are left alone to work, they usually perform better than when surrounded by other people, loyal to their employer and focused on the task. They will have great careers as nurses, housekeepers, gardeners, politicians and decorators.

For Cancer representatives, security and money are of great importance and stand for the real reason they work as much as they do. They easily earn money and aren't used to spending it all in one day. It is their goal to save, invest, and watch their investments grow daily. Resourceful and good at managing time and finances, this is a sign that is often in charge of all money in the household, keeping their partner or other family members under control.

How to Attract the Cancer Man

A Cancer man is conservative just enough to know that initiative is important, but often fails to show it before he feels safe to do so. His partners need to make the first move, but still doing it subtly to let him still feel like he is leading the way. This is a complex individual, very sensitive, shy and overly protective of his loved ones. When he prefers women, he will subconsciously search for the ideal wife and mother.

A Cancer man is an emotional person, who loves to take care of other people. He wants to feel needed, and protective, receiving a lot of attention from his partner through kind words and subtle concerns and compliments to make his day. Although he can be moody, pessimistic and clingy, he is a creative and generous partner in search for someone to share a life with.

How to Attract the Cancer Woman

Cancer personality can be quite complicated, but deep inside they are home-loving and conservative people. A Cancer woman is vulnerable, emotional, and not likely to quickly fall in love. Once her trust is earned, she will be passionate and loyal. In order to seduce her, one has to be proactive and make the first move, respecting her need to be treated like a lady. She is not the right choice for someone in search for a one-night stand, and needs more from her partner than just casual encounters. Romantic and ready to love, this woman needs a romantic partner who believes in love, while also in tune with her unspoken feelings.

Despite her cautious nature, a Cancer woman is deeply erotic and when feeling secure to show her true personality and emotions, they will be expressed through an incredible sex life. To have lasting relationship with a Cancer woman, she needs someone faithful, respectful and honest, for doesn't forget betrayal and becomes very rigid and unpredictable when hurt.

Compatible Signs Cancer Should Consider: Taurus, Virgo, Scorpio, Pisces, Capricorn