MARFA, TEX. — Robert Irwin is not a conceptual artist. But if he were, his trademark concept over the last half-century might have been devising hugely ambitious public installations that are virtually guaranteed never to be realized.

There was the 1981 proposal for a soaring walk-in aviary in a dilapidated New Orleans park, which thoroughly confused the city elders who awarded him the design commission. (“I won the thing,” Mr. Irwin recalled, “and then I never heard from them again.”) There were the plans for projects along the Ohio River in Cincinnati, a park in Fort Worth, Battery Park in New York, a transit station at Chicago’s O’Hare International Airport, a viaduct in downtown Los Angeles and the Miami International Airport — which he spent years trying to redesign and which, like all the other projects, stayed on the drawing board as civic will or money evaporated. What most people who dream of enlisting an artist to help them re-envision public space really want, “deep down in their heart of hearts,” Mr. Irwin once said, is “a Henry Moore.”

But Mr. Irwin doesn’t make sculptures or, for that matter, very many of what would be considered art objects of any kind. Instead, he has spent most of a restless career, based in Los Angeles and then San Diego, creating subtle, at times vanishingly evanescent, environments with plain materials — fabric scrim, glass, lights, plants and trees — “to make you a little more aware than you were the day before,” as he puts it, “of how beautiful the world is.” And now, at 87, after decades of often lonesome proselytizing for his brand of art, he may finally be seeing the art world coming around to his way of thinking.

Photo

On a recent sun-streaked morning, Mr. Irwin tipped back a hard hat and surveyed cinder-block walls rising from the arid West Texas scrubland here, the beginnings of what will be the first permanent installation of its kind designed by him in America, on the grounds of the Chinati Foundation in Marfa. Founded by the sculptor Donald Judd, Chinati is a mecca of work made mostly by minimalist artists who came of age, as Mr. Irwin did, during the 1960s, as painting and traditional sculpture gave way to a more complex, amorphous vision of what art could do.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Permanent works by many of the artists Mr. Judd admired — Dan Flavin, Carl Andre, John Wesley — are part of the foundation’s collection, and it is believed he wanted a work by Mr. Irwin, whom he befriended in the 1970s, to be part of the complex, too. But Mr. Judd died in 1994 before that could happen. And it has taken more than 15 years of false starts, scrapped plans and painstaking fund-raising for the project, scheduled to open to the public this summer, to come into being, as simple as the idea may sound: a C-shaped building with no artificial light (only what comes in through the large, regularly spaced windows); walls of translucent scrim bisecting the interior, making views inside dissolve into a kind of vapor; and a courtyard with Palo Verde trees and a collection of jutting basalt columns that suggest a prehistoric skyline.