Looking for MAC makeup dupes that won’t break the bank but will add to your collection? Check out my favorites!

The Best MAC Makeup Dupes

A good bargain is irresistible, especially when it comes to makeup. This is exactly why a lot of women are on the lookout for the best drugstore dupes out there. MAC is one of the most popular makeup brands in the world, but it’s not too popular with our wallets.

Personally, if I find a dupe that works really well, it goes in my kit. I am always on the look out for awesome makeup dupes that function well and are priced better.

If you are like me and itching to get your hands on these babies. So, before you burn your pockets splurging on high-end makeup, check out the best MAC makeup dupes to get your hands on:

Do you love MAC’s primer? You can get the same finish for a fraction of the price with Rimmel’s matte primer. MAC Prep + Prime costs $30, while Rimmel’s primer will only set you back $6.47, saving you $13.50 just by making the switch.

MAC’s popular face and body foundation is known for its lightweight coverage and natural finish. Surprisingly, Maybelline’s FIT me! foundation offers the same coverage and finish as well. What’s the price difference? You can get the MAC foundation at $42 and the Maybelline Fit Me! for only $7.

3. MAC Studio Fix Powder Plus Foundation VS Rimmel Stay Matte Pressed Powder

If MAC’s Studio Fix Powder Plus foundation has been a staple in your makeup kit, but you find the price to be getting more expensive by the day, why not give Rimmel’s Stay Matte Pressed Powder a try? The Studio Fix is priced at around $35 and the Stay Matte powder is only $6.50. They show the same finish and the same coverage too.

MAC’s Studio Fix concealer is a product women swear by. However, if getting one jar after another is too costly, give NYX Full Coverage concealer a try. The price difference? $14. MAC concealer is priced at $19, while the one from NYX is only $5.

The MAC Melba blush is inside a lot of professional makeup artist’s kit and is priced at $22, while the NYX Mauve blush is priced between $5.99 to $7.50. What a big price difference considering the color and finish are identical.

6. MAC Mineralize SkinFinish Gold Deposit VS Makeup Revolution Vivid ‘Rock On World’ Baked Bronzer

If you’re looking for a bronzer that is very close to the shade of MAC’s Mineralize SkinFinish in Gold Deposit, the closest thing you can buy is Makeup Revolution’s Rock On World Baked Bronzer. Although Rock On World is slightly lighter, the price difference makes it an essential buy. Gold Deposit is priced at around $37, while Rock On World only costs around $6.

7. MAC Nylon Eyeshadow VS NYX Barely There Eyeshadow

Looking for a cheaper alternative to MAC’s Nylon eyeshadow as your highlighter? Well next in line is the NYX Barely There Eyeshadow. Just look at the almost identical shades. Nylon is priced at $16, while Barely There will only cost you $4.

8. MAC Eyeshadows VS Drugstore Dupes

Smokey eyes, nude eyes or golden eyes? No problem! I’ve got this drugstore dupes for you, that’s 70% or more on savings!

9. MAC Spiked Eyebrow Pencil VS Maybelline Define-A-Brow

Filling in your eyebrows is crucial to your look, but getting the right shade is just as important. If you’ve been using MAC’s Spiked Eyebrow Pencil, you can switch to Maybelline’s Define-A-Brow instead. MAC’s pencil is priced at $16, while Maybelline’s pencil is only priced at $5.50.

10. MAC Liquidlast Liner VS Milani Infinite

If you want to wear eyeliner that’s long-lasting and won’t smudge, MAC’s Liquidlast Liner will definitely deliver. However, if you finish your tube fast, maybe you should try a cheaper alternative like Milani’s Infinite liquid liner. Liquidlast will cost you $20 a tube, while Milani will only take $7.99 from your wallet.

11. MAC 1 Faux Eyelashes VS Elegant Lashes in #006 Black

If you’re a big fan of false eyelashes, I’m sure you’ve noticed how expensive it can get when you’re continuously having to buy new sets. After all, MAC 1 False Eyelashes at $16 a pop is just not right! But wait, there’s an exact dupe of this in Elegant Lashes’ #006 and how much does this cost? $7.32 for 3 pairs, that’s $2.44 each pair! When you get more, the price goes down even more. Whoa!

12. MAC Prep + Prime Lip VS NYX Lip Primer

Wearing lipstick everyday can make your lip primer run out fairly quickly. Instead of buying MAC Prep + Prime Lip over and over again at $16, perhaps you should buy NYX Lip Primer instead at only $6.99.

13. MAC Lipsticks VS Drugstore Dupes

I’m saving the best for last. I know you guys love MAC’s lipsticks because of their awesome shades, but hold on just one minute. Did you know you can buy makeup dupes in the same shade you love? You can save $7-$11 on your lippies allowing you to collect some more!

We all know how much we love MAC lipsticks so check out this video by KathleenLights to find more dupes:

Why spend $30 on makeup you can get for less than $10? Don’t feel too bad, it’s not the end of the world. Starting today, you’ll know where to go when you need to shop for makeup. You’ll smile ear-to-ear with all the savings and I’m sure your wallet will be left smiling too. Splurge or save? Definitely, save!

Let me know which of these makeup dupes you’re most excited to get in the comments section below, you might also want to check out some ingenious lipstick tricks for a beautiful pout.

Check out our new store Scrumptious for makeup products, clothes, accessories and more!

Follow my Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and Pinterest accounts to get the latest makeup, hair and nail trends!

Featured Image via Rosy Chicc

Editor’s Note – This post was originally published in October 2016 and has been updated for quality and relevancy.