I write this from my sickbed, surrounded by tissues and product testers. One advantage of not leaving the house for days is that one can take a worthwhile break from makeup, while feeling sufficiently bored to take one’s time over skincare and try some new products you might not otherwise.

My favourite of these is Superdrug’s splendid new Naturally Radiant Glycolic Acid Toner, £5.99. It’s satisfying to see the high street launch a liquid exfoliant, since most are so expensive – though I’d consider them an essential. Not to be confused with classic toner or tonic (pointless, but if you enjoy using, then be my guest), these are exfoliating solutions containing either alpha hydroxy acids (usually extracted from fruit) to slough away dull skin and improve uneven tone, and/or the more oil-soluble beta hydroxy acids (usually salicylic) to treat spots and blackheads. The Superdrug toner contains the former (in an impressive 5% concentration) and does a lovely job of brightening even my poorly complexion, leaving it soft and receptive to treatment products like serums and masks (I’m on my third of the week). It’s also vegan-friendly.

Likewise, I love Derma E Refining Vitamin A & Glycolic Acid Toner, £9.60, another vegan AHA solution, this time packed with antioxidants like niacinamide (particularly effective against open pores and environmental pollutants). It’s hard to find a better and more reasonably priced exfoliant for 35+ skin.

Beauty: a brilliant tinted moisturiser Read more

For those who are younger, or just prone to adult acne and oiliness, I enthusiastically recommend Paula’s Choice Skin Perfecting 2% BHA Liquid Exfoliant, £8. This is one of the few BHAs I can happily use on my dry skin, since most others contain more alcohol than a Wetherspoons.

If your complexion is a little of A and a little of B, then it’s possible to use both glow-giving AHAs and pore-cleansing BHAs simultaneously. Among my favourites for the job is REN’s Clarimatte Clarifying Toner, pricier at £15, but a solid all-rounder for men and women of any age.

Personally, I use liquid exfoliants five times a week (drenching a cotton pad and sweeping over cleansed face), but I’d recommend starting with twice, allowing your skin to become acclimatised (some tingling is normal). Finishing with an SPF is essential, so be honest with yourself and use acids at night if you’re unlikely to bother.