I love long walks and runs, but I tend to not too many of them for one reason: I get bored. Walking 5 miles (or 10) is boring. My Pandora playlist and podcasts can only keep me so entertained, and after mile two I tend to get distracted enough about things I need or want to do at home that I call it quits. At the gym, I came up with a solution for this by watching a TV show or movie on my iPad. Outside, which is my preference, I started walking to destinations.



I did my first destination-based marathon maybe a decade ago. I had signed up for a Nike+ Half Marathon back in the day before everyone had a Fitbit. My Nike+ tracker fit in the bottom of my running shoes. The virtual nature of the marathon (you could do it from wherever) enticed me to sign up (it was the future!), but as the race day approached, I realized my patience to run would probably only last six miles. 13.1 miles sounded like torture, not from a physical perspective, but from a sheer time on the road one. And then I came up with the idea of splitting the trip up between destinations.



Advertisement

Since then I’ve incorporated destination into a lot of my workouts, and I think it’s made me much more willing to do them.



With the destination-based half marathon, I broke the 13 miles up into a few different stops. I started at 7am at my house and ran downtown, which was roughly five miles. Downtown I picked up breakfast, and then I walked another three miles to the local farmer’s market. I picked up some things there, and walked them home. After that, I was maybe 3 miles from success, three miles that I ran to meet some friends for a late lunch. I made it 13.1 miles, but it didn’t feel like 13.1 miles. I also had people meet me at a few destinations. A group did that first run with me, and a few others met us for breakfast and walked to the farmer’s market.



I’ve never done a full destination-based half marathon again (although I’ve come close), but I have built workouts into my daily errands. There’s a grocery store a few miles from my house I really like, and I always walk there when I need to shop rather than drive. Round trip, that means I’ve walked almost five miles, longer than I likely would have if I’d just gone out for a walk without a destination in mind. The trick also works for planned hikes, where I know I’m shooting for a waterfall or overlook.



Advertisement

Yes, it would be better if I just ran the whole thing, but I’ve accepted that running and walking long distances is just something I’m not going to do. My runs are much better when they’re done just a few miles at a time. For longer journeys, when I have a destination in mind there’s a finish line of sorts that I’m striving for which makes things easier, even though that finish line is also a starting line for the next leg.



If you’re having trouble pushing yourself to go that extra mile (or seven) then it’s something I’d recommend giving a try.

Have any tips of your own for getting the motivation for longer walks and runs? Share them in the comments.