With our 2014 makeup routines, we really went back to basics. After all, you can’t ace your favorite celeb’s multi-dimensional smokey eye before you know how to correctly smudge liner in the first place. And so the bulk of these 36 makeup tutorials act as stepping stones to putting your very *own* twists on classic beauty looks — ones the red carpet has yet to see — along with must-try hacks that will have you blotting, filling and blending like a pro in no time. That means the next time you want to master everyday office makeup, plump your lips for a party or completely transform your features for Halloween, be sure to brush up on all things 101 here first so you’re ready for the next-level looks we’ve got coming in 2015.

COVER YOUR BASICS

1. Everything You Need to Know About Applying Blush: Get the low down on powder, stain and cream blushes, as well as application tricks and tips for when to wear certain shades. (via Brit + Co)

2. Tips for Acing Everyday Eye Makeup: It’s all about those zones — get well acquainted with the areas around your eye and the brushes you should use on them before you learn to DIY three weekday-ready looks. (via Brit + Co)

3. How to Buy + Wear Lip Products: Balm, stain, gloss, stick – yep, the gang’s all here! Scroll through to see which product works best for you! (via Brit + Co)

4. Your Guide to DIY Brow Shaping: There’s more to getting killer brows than plucking and tweezing. Learn two makeup artist-approved ways to add depth and structure to your brows. (via Brit + Co)

5. Nail the Perfect Smokey Eye for YOUR Eye Shape: Not all smokey eyes are created equal! See which style will give your eyes the most smoldering look of them all. (via Brit + Co)

6. Tried + Tested: The ABCs of BB, CC + DD Creams: You’ve heard about them, but what’s all the buzz about? Find out everything you need to know about these all-in-one products that combine the powers of serum, primer, moisturizer, foundation, SPF and powder. (via Brit + Co)

7. Fresh Ways to Contour Like a Pro: Learn where to highlight, where to contour and how to blend it like a true Kardashian. (via Brit + Co)

8. How Red Lipsticks Will Look on Different Skin Tones: Nervous about how that orangey-red lipstick will look on your skin tone? Sneak a peek at how different shades look on for real girls before you splurge. (via Brit + Co)

9. Essential Makeup Brushes (+ How to Use ‘em!): These are the only nine makeup brushes you’ll ever need. Learn when to whip them out like a pro here. (via Brit + Co)

10. Ways to Rock a Killer Cat Eye: Once you nail the technique for forming the famous flick, the color possibilities are endless. (via Brit + Co)

11 Must-Have Makeup Products for a Completely Natural Look: Consider these seven makeup products your everyday essentials for creating a flawless base face. (via Brit + Co)

MAKEUP HACKS

12. How to Waterproof Your Makeup Routine: Don’t ever freak about mascara streaks again once you shield your makeup against natural forces like heat or sweat. (via Brit + Co)

13. Lipstick Hacks Every Woman Needs to Know: There’s just a bit more to kissable lips than meets the eye. See three insanely clever lipstick hacks in action so you never leave for a date without a perfect pout. (via Brit + Co)

14. Plump Your Lips Using Cayenne and Kool-Aid: With Kool-Aid as a stain and cayenne as a natural plumper, get flushed, fuller lips in just one glossy swipe. (via Brit + Co)

15. Makeup Tricks for Girls Who Wear Glasses: Your lenses are front and center, but your makeup *can* steal the show. (via Brit + Co)

16. That’s Not Eyeliner — That Cat Eye Is Made from a Magazine: Take the cat eye to the next level by skipping the liner all together. Use patterns and graphics from a magazine for a makeup look unlike anything you’ve ever worn before. (via Brit + Co)

17. The Ultimate Way to Organize Your Makeup: Ever wish you could fit alllll of those compacts into just one totable case? This genius palette was made for that — just learn how to hack your makeup to fit. (via Brit + Co)

PARTY-READY LOOKS

18. 3 Runway-Inspired Ways to Wear Graphic Eyeliner: Take the classic winged eyeliner to much more fabulous levels with this tutorial that shows you three new ways to wear the look. (via Brit + Co)

19. 3 Luminescent Looks that Go for the Glow: Enhance that dewy skin with three frosty looks that will have you complexion glowing. (via Brit + Co)

20. 3 Easy Ways to DIY Full Lips: Plump your pout with some stealthy liner — that’s all it takes to get this insanely kissable pucker. (via Brit + Co)

21. 3 Ways to Wow With Glitter Makeup: Get glitter to stay put with these three grown up ways to show off your sparkly side. (via Brit + Co)

22. 4 Ways to Wear Neon Eyeliner: Bolder is better with this tutorial that shows you ways you can *totally* incorporate neon makeup into your everyday beauty routine. (via Brit + Co)

23. 4 Fruity Lipstick Shades to Make Your Lips Pop: Stand out from the crowd with vibrant berry-inspired lips. Just choose your fruity muse to get started! (via Brit + Co)

24. 5 Gold Makeup Looks to Bring Out Your Inner Goddess: Glow in gold from brow to lip with these five gilded makeup looks. (via Brit + Co)

DIY WEDDING MAKEUP

25. Dramatic Makeup Looks for Anyone in Your Bridal Party: Give your bridesmaids the makeover they really want with these head-turning beauty looks that won’t cost them a thing. (via Brit + Co)

26. How to DIY the 3 Most Requested Bridal Makeup Looks: Learn how to recreate the timeless “blushing bride” look and more in this priceless tutorial for DIY brides. (via Brit + Co)

HALLOWEEN TRANSFORMATIONS

27. Queen of Hearts Makeup: It’s easy to see why the Queen of Hearts was the most popular YouTube makeup tutorial this Halloween. Learn how to trump this look with the makeup you already own. (via Brit + Co)

28. The Fairest Woodland Fairy in All the Land: A woodland fairy is nothing without her sunkissed complexion and those butterfly brows. (via Brit + Co)

29. How to Become a Gorgeous Ghost: Gray hair is the new platinum. Just match your makeup with your on-trend tresses to nail the gorgeous ghost look. (via Brit + Co)

30. A Modern Vampire Beauty Tutorial: Vamp it up with this tutorial that favors deep ’90s hues to get the gothy vibes across. (via Brit + Co)

31. Turn Yourself into a Mermaid: We don’t need to list the reasons you should want to look like a mermaid, but we’ll name a few anyway: try shimmering scales, iridescent lashes and a dreamy ocean blue wig. (via Brit + Co)

32. The Creepy (But Kinda Pretty) Doll Face: Kind of creepy, kind of pretty is just the uncomfortable balance you want to strike for Halloween, right? Then this doll face tutorial is for you! (via Brit + Co)

33. The Purrfect Black Cat: Give the basic black cat a high-style makeover with perky black lips, adorable freckles and of course, a killer cat eye. (via Brit + Co)

34. The Completely Creepy Clown: Half mime, half clown, 100% frightening. And don’t even thinking about putting on that foam nose. (via Brit + Co)

35. Turn Yourself Into a Witch: Contour your way to a green complexion that’s so badass no one will have to ask if you’re wicked or not. (via Brit + Co)

36. Katy Perry’s Dark Horse Makeup: Take a makeup cue from your favorite pop star and learn how to paint on the cat eye of a lifetime (+ DIY the costume to match!). (via Brit + Co)

What were your favorite makeup tutorials from 2014? Were they breaking down basics or pushing beauty boundaries? Tell us which ones you clicked on most in the comments below.