Of course, there's always the chance that Affleck's character was just too stupid to make a copy of the single most important document in his life, in which case he was a disgrace to his profession anyway and fully deserved a Sam Jackson on his case.

1 There's A Reason Real Police Don't Work With Vigilantes Like Bruce Wayne There's A Reason Real Police Don't Work With Vigilantes Like Bruce Wayne

Obviously Batman operates outside the law -- The Dark Knight has a whole subplot about his pending prosecution for filling emergency rooms with Gotham's criminal underclass. It's when he works with the cops that things get complicated.

The most dramatic and idiotic example comes midway through that same film. Our heroes are faced with a problem: The key witness they want to use to prosecute the entire mob (Lau, the accountant that launders their dirty money) has skipped his happy ass back to Hong Kong, and is outside the jurisdiction of the Gotham District Attorney's office. We're then treated to this scene:



"Do I really need to be here for this pissing contest? Can you just give me an address?"

While on top of Gotham's police headquarters, D.A. Harvey Dent, police top dog Jim Gordon, and a billionaire dressed like a bat all hatch a plan to bring Lau back to Gotham, so he can testify against the mob. The problem is that the Chinese government "won't extradite a national under any circumstances." The solution: Since Batman isn't beholden to any pesky "laws," he can just kidnap the dude and bring him back to Gotham. Vigilante loophole, baby!

The Legal Reality:

No. Shit no. What?

While the vigilante loophole the movie seeks to exploit has a point in a "you can totally rob a bank if you don't get caught" sense, it loses a modicum of credibility if said vigilante goes on missions at the behest of the chief of police and the district attorney. If that were possible, every single police department would have a squad of dudes in rodent costumes running black-ops missions any time they can't get a warrant.



"You realize that the reason we can't jail organized crime members isn't because we can't physically arrest them, right?"

In reality, Batman would be considered a state actor, someone acting on behalf of a governmental body, and thus someone who's very, very much subject to the same regulation they are. Some indicators of state involvement that would qualify Batman as a state actor are: 1) a clear connection between the police and the private investigation, 2) completion of the private act at the instigation of the police, and 3) the private act is undertaken on the behalf of the police to further a police objective.

"But how would anyone prove that?" you ask. How about the fact that there's a goddamn Bat signal on the top of Gotham PD, specifically used to summon Batman for this mission? Legally, it's as if Gordon had gone to Hong Kong with a SWAT team and kidnapped Lau himself. That'd result in quite a shitstorm when it comes time to answer to the dozen or so enraged agencies who are going to be screaming questions at them in at least two languages.

Warner Bros. Studios

"It's cool, I read the Wikipedia page on extradition."

Of course, the same logic can also be applied to pretty much every iteration of Batman who has provably aligned himself with the Gotham City Police Department. All the bad guys he's beaten to submission? Police brutality. All the evidence he's Batmanned up in ways normal cops couldn't? Constitutional limitations on search and seizure apply -- might as well toss it. Bet you feel real good about the Bat signal and the red phone now, Bruce!

Nick is a lawyer who hopes his writing career will continue to keep him out of the courtroom. Nothing in this article should be considered legal advice: This is a comedy website, ya dummy. Jordan Breeding has a blog, a band, and did pretty well in a music law class one time.

Also check out 25 Movie Heroes You Didn't Know Were Breaking The Law and 7 Movies With Horrible Mass Deaths You Never Noticed.

Subscribe to our YouTube channel, and check out The Horrifying Truth About Living Inside A TV Show, and other videos you won't see on the site!

Follow us on Facebook, and we'll follow you everywhere.