America is constipated, says one Trump supporter—and The Donald? He’s “our new MiraLAX!”

The bus tells you everything you need to know because the bus is a piece of shit. You would expect a Donald Trump campaign bus to be MOST LUXURIOUS, MOST DESIRED, NUMBER ONE BUS in the world, with a solid-gold chassis and marble toilets and a rooftop fuck cabana. This is not that bus. “It’s just a bus,” one Trump staffer told me, which is exactly right. It’s an old cross-country bus that still smells like an old cross-country bus, only it’s painted blue, with the name TRUMP in huge letters across both sides, plus the campaign hashtag #Make America Great Again! Trump says he has copyrighted it (“I’m using that a lot, and I think it’s a great statement”) even though you can’t actually put exclamation points or spaces in a hashtag.

The bus is basically a rolling version of Trump’s Atlantic City: it’s built to look nice for a single day, then it falls into disrepair the moment you’ve stopped paying attention. From a distance, though, the bus looks like a monument. You see the name, and you take in everything that name connotes—wealth, ego, poor taste—and the bus has done its job. This is Trump’s bus, and it dominates the landscape the moment it arrives. People from all around take selfies near it. Why? Because TRUMP, that’s why.

EDITOR’S PICK

And the bus is working. Perhaps you’ve noticed—or perhaps you’re trying not to notice—but Donald Trump is leading all current Republican candidates in the national polls, and his lead is growing. And so it doesn’t really matter whether you see this as an alarming sign of the nation’s growing lunacy, or as a reckoning for a GOP that has been awash for years in hateful rhetoric, or as a byproduct of Trump’s masterful ability to hijack all political coverage by embracing his role as America’s Master Idiot. He’s doing it. At least for a brief moment, he’s winning. And he may extend his lead once the GOP debates begin Thursday night. Trump has managed to plaster his name all over this election as if it were one of his overpriced condos, and he has drawn the crowds as a result.

And these are real voters out here who are responding to him: real voters who are lining up for his rallies in large numbers (not as large as Trump claims, but still!), real voters who hang on every word of his ridiculous pitch for how he will wheel and deal America back to the top.

But who the fuck are these people? Are they blind? Are they crazy? Have they been brainwashed by all the giant signs? Or is it possible they see something in Trump that the rest of us don’t? What makes someone want to seriously consider voting for this man? I didn’t know what the answer was, but I wanted to see for myself. I needed to make it make sense. So I went to Iowa—Iowa: The State You Grew Up Swearing You’d Leave One Day!™—to meet them. And to see The Donald in the flesh.

Every election dispatch from Iowa is required to include a bit of scenery-setting, to show you just how folksy Iowa is: corn, state fairs, dragonflies, balloon museums, smiling fat babies, etc.

This is not the Iowa I visited. The Donald Trump Make America Great Again Rally and Family Picnic was held in Oskaloosa, a small town 60 miles east of Des Moines. Oskaloosa is like a lot of small Midwestern towns right now: crumbling houses, shuttered businesses, half-empty strip malls. You are surrounded by loss here. One of the few thriving businesses I saw in town, apart from a kickass bar called The Cellar Peanut Pub, was a video store. An actual video store. They didn’t even have to rent porn to stay solvent. They had customers, and they were hiring.

Oskaloosa has been left behind in the Information Age. What has left here is never coming back, no matter what any politician or businessman promises. And people in Osky—the locals call it “Osky”—don’t look pleased about this. Contrary to friendly Midwestern stereotypes, they look PISSED. Every man I saw in town looked like your father-in-law the first time you met him at the door. Out on the empty roads, the only vehicles are big, angry pickup trucks with huge side mirrors sticking way out, like they wanna punch your car. People here are aggrieved. People here have had a lot of disappointment, and they are sick of it.

Like Karen and Diane. Along with a bunch of friends and family, they showed up early this morning to the 696-seat George Daily Community Auditorium (which Oskaloosa’s middle school and high school share) so they could get as close to their billionaire savior as possible. To “see the color of his eyes,” Diane said. I greeted their group as they waited by the door, many of them sitting in nylon golf chairs, nervous about losing their spot in line.

“I like that Trump won’t back down,” Karen told me. “He says what he means and he means what he’s saying. He ain’t going to say he’s sorry. Sometimes he likes to say things not politically correct, but they all better get used to that. The people who do speak politically correct have been losers.”

“They constipated America!” Diane said, rocking a House of Blues t-shirt. “What we have had is politicians and lawyers who have constipated America. Let’s get a businessman in there and get things moving! We need our new MiraLAX!”

Do you believe everything Trump says?

“At this point, I’m inclined to say he’s not lying.”

Do you think he exaggerates sometimes?

“Oh yeah. Who doesn’t?”

“He is for America,” Karen says. “He is for the elderly. He is for the quiet people.”

Who are “the quiet people”?

“The people like us, that a lot of times walk around with the attitude that, ‘Oh, it doesn’t matter what I think. I’m just from Osky.’ You know? The quiet people. The people who don’t think they have a voice.”

Karen used to live in Arizona, where she had a job at a semiconductor plant, adding gold buttons to each chip in on anassembly line. But the plant was relocated to China, and so she lost her job and relocated here. As you could probably surmise, she likes Trump’s tough talk about foreigners stealing our jobs. I had arrived in Iowa just as Trump was doubling down on his comments that Mexico was sending “rapists” across our border; people here loved it, and seemed oddly emotional about the subject of immigration, even though Iowa is nowhere near the border. Apparently, it’s not just the immigrants from Mexico that concern Iowans for Trump. “We need to get the Muslims out of the country,” a man named Bob with a swirling white beard told me, “before they start killing our families!” Everyone around him nodded.

The line to see Trump grew longer and stretched across the front of Oskaloosa middle school. A local Hy-Vee supermarket put up picnic tables and gave away bottled water, potato salad, pulled pork, and hot dogs thick as flashlights. Elderly people tooted around on Rascal scooters. An enterprising man hocked all-purpose GOP fanboy buttons with slogans like BENGHAZI MATTERS.

I met an old couple wearing matching Trump t-shirts, which they told me they wore every day. “I haven’t had one bad comment on it,” said the wife. I met a man named Wayne who voted for Obama twice but was now firmly in Trump’s corner. I met ANOTHER man named Wayne who walked me carefully through his five-point rationale for why Trump was the best candidate. (Voters often show up at these rallies with little stump speeches of their own.) I met a woman named Jill who showed up with several hand-drawn signs. (My favorite was “Beltway Talks; Trump Works.”) Jill was fired the fuck up for some Trump in her life. I don’t know how it’s possible to be so fired up with the election so far away, but Jill was blazing. She wanted to make sure the whole world knew that Trump and his voters were for real.

“I was terribly insulted when [John McCain] called us crazies,” Jill told me.

What is it that you like so much about Trump?

“He’s a capitalist,” Jill explained. “That inspires me.”

I also ran into a very rare minority in the crowd—a Pakistani woman who emigrated here from Pakistan 40 years ago and didn’t like the idea of anyone skirting the naturalization process.

“I came in the right way,” she told me. “When you try to do things the right way, it doesn’t work. And all these illegals sneaking in, and being able to stay—how do they get to do that?”

And you think Trump will make things fairer.

“Well, as long as he does a better job than what’s being done. You know?”

A nervous drug counselor named Tracy was also in line to see Trump. Unlike some of the others, she had some concerns about him. Well, one: “He’s an atheist,” she said.

A man nearby overheard us talking and told us he shared her worry. “We have to elect godly men.”

But Jill—the sign lady—cut into the conversation and came to the rescue: “He’s not an atheist. I wanted to correct that. He explained the church he’s gone to his whole life. He didn’t articulate it as well as he should have. But you know what? That articulation—I’m not concerned with that.”

That seemed to cool Tracy’s hangups about Trump being a godless heathen.

And I spotted a woman pushing around a stroller with a photograph of a live abortion taped to it, along with a big sign that read “DEAR PLANNED PARENTHOOD, I AM NOT FOR SALE.” For some reason, the woman ditched the stroller in the middle of the path leading to the auditorium, and a squat veteran named Randy went to alert the police. “That’s a good way to get a bomb brought in,” he said. While we all stared at the stroller, looking for any suspicious bulges (it turned out to be clean), Randy explained to me why he had a big ol’ Trump-on.

“I like what he has to say. He won’t take no shit from nobody.”

What’s your favorite thing he’s said?

“You’re fired!”

Who would you like him to fire, besides Obama?

“Let’s see: John Kerry, our last governor, the attorney general, every Muslim that they put in…”

Randy seemed untroubled by Trump’s lack of polish, or knowledge, or basic human grace. Far from it—these were virtues. “You don’t have to be a brain to run a business,” Randy said. “Just an ass. Sometimes you can be nice and polite, but there’s sometimes you’ve just got to be a horse’s ass with somebody to get them to do what they’re supposed to be doing.”

So far, I’d heard Trump compared—favorably—to a horse’s ass and to a laxative, and I began to imagine a Trump campaign poster that was just a big horse’s butthole spewing hot diarrhea.

So you believe Trump has the fearlessness to run this country?

“I know he does,” said Randy. “Have you ever watched The Apprentice?”

I talked to more voters and a pattern emerged in the answers. Trump was “honest,” “not PC,” “authentic,” “shooting from the hip,” and “called a spade a spade.” And of course, he wasn’t from Washington. He was gonna get in there and shake things up.

We’ve heard all of this before, from many, many other candidates. Every presidential election has at least one magical, imaginary OUTSIDER—that teenage wet dream of a president who rides into Washington, tells those bureaucrats what shitheads they are, and bulldozes Congress into doing cool shit simply with the power of his huge cock. I have fallen for this kind of candidate. YOU have fallen for this kind of candidate. Everybody wants this mythical Bulworth to exist, but at this level of politics, there are no outsiders, and the game changes its rules for no one.

And yet, people buy in. Maybe this time, they think, the guy who says he’s different really is different.

And Trump, to his credit, is definitely different.

Noon was approaching and the doors to the auditorium opened. Trump supporters poured into seats in front of the stage and onto a set of risers behind the podium. The hated media—that would include me—sat toward the back.

After a couple of introductory speeches from a local politician and a member of Seal Team Seven (not Six, but Seven—they’re one better!), we were greeted by former Apprentice runner-up Tana Goertz, who also happens to be Trump 2016’s Iowa co-chair and a “well-known Bedazzler spokeswoman.”

“We all know how much Donald Trump is worth!” Goertz cried out, inaccurately. “How much?” The response from the crowd was messy and overlapping—many wild guesses called out at once.

“I’ve met a lot of smart people,” Goertz continued, undaunted, “but I have never met a man that thinks about working when other people are talking about working.”

Wait, what?

“At the heart of it all, he’s a builder. Who better than Donald Trump to rebuild this country?”

Okay, that’s a metaphor I can get behind.

“You have never ever in your life experienced what you’re about to experience today. I’m just going to say: Sit back, put on your seatbelt. It’s going to be a fun ride. You will enjoy the experience and the ride, which is Donald Trump.”

Finally—after a quick Pledge of Allegiance—the man himself emerged through a side door, carried aloft by the strains of Joe Esposito’s “You’re The Best.”

I saw the hair first. It arrived in two parts: first the Turtle Wax-ed strands that run along both sides of his scalp, then the champagne glitter yarn kit perched top. I’d never seen Trump before, and the hair was all that I’d hoped for, and more. And after announcing his intention to molest all of Iowa’s chief export (“I want to grab that corn like you’ve never seen—so beautiful”) the ride started up.

I’m gonna say a few nice things about Donald Trump now. If that terrifies you, then by all means, skim through this section and carry on with your existence.

But I must tell you that, in person, Donald Trump is a very entertaining public speaker. And is this really such a surprise? Ever since* The Art of the Deal*, Trump has spent decades giving speeches all over the country, acting as our Get-Rich-Quick godfather. When he gets in front of a microphone, he requires no notes. No teleprompter. He is confident. He is casual. He is charming. Everyone is a “great guy” or an “amazing negotiator.”

He can even be funny. When I texted a friend from the event that Trump was hilarious in person, he texted back, “NO. No no no.” Sorry, it’s true. It’s still not clear whether he’s in on the joke—there’s always been a bit of mystery to how aware Donald Trump is that Donald Trump is full of shit. But when you see him in person, and you hear him claim that the term “Supreme Leader” would be more fitting for him than for the head of Iran, there is the tiniest hint that he knows what a ludicrous thing this is to say. Even his exaggerations are hilarious. He said this was the biggest crowd in state history, even though we were in a public-school auditorium. He said he was worth more than $10 billion, a figure that is impossible for him to prove but also impossible for us to disprove. He said he made $213 million from The Apprentice, a figure which NBC steadfastly refutes.

At one point, Trump boasted about how much veterans adore him. To prove it, he trotted out a gorgeous brunette who was carrying a perfect stack of white paper topped with a bow. I swear it looked like an unwrapped package of blank Hammermill printer paper. “In one day,” Trump blared, “many hundreds of letters from Vietnam vets, thanking me. This is from veterans. Each page, a different letter. It’s amazing.”

Everyone ate it up. They laughed and cheered and hollered out in approval all through his speech. It was more like a late-night monologue, and true to his reputation, Trump is not careful with his words. You can see why people think he’s more “honest” than one of the other randos in the GOP field—he’s gifted at not sounding like a politician even as he deploys standard tricks from the “I’m not a politician” handbook. He is definitely more fun to watch than Bobby Jindal. I wish there were more Trump-like candidates out there who are not Donald Trump, if that makes any sense.

He also made a good point or two in between all the noise. At one point he bellowed: “I read Jeb Bush raised over a hundred million dollars. Now if you think that those people giving him all those money aren’t getting a lot, you’re wrong. All of these people are controlled by the people who gave them their money.” He’s right! It’s true! Holy shit, Donald Trump said a true thing. I heard it with my own two ears.

If Donald Trump has one undeniable virtue as a politician, it’s that he does not try to fake being one of us. He’s not going to the fucking Bowl-o-Rama on a Saturday night in a plaid shirt to prove he’s a man of the people. The whole thrust of The Donald’s campaign is that he is special. He is extraordinary. In Osky, he compared his business acumen to Jack Nicklaus’ golfing ability and Babe Ruth’s hitting ability. (“It’s called talent. Talent.”) He is a WINNER, and he is here to help this nation of sad losers learn how to win again.

“We don’t win anymore in this country,” he told the crowd. “When was the last time we won? When did we beat China in a deal? We don’t win.”

Well, Trump is here to fix all that losing. And here is where my brief jag of mildly effusive praise for Donald Trump must come to an end, because the grim undercurrent of his rise is SHAME. After all, if you believe we must make America great again, then you must also believe that America, at the present moment, sucks. And pretty much everyone at the Trump picnic believed that America sucks. When I asked a group of Trump supporters outside if they were proud of America, they all laughed with derision. Of course they weren’t proud of America. Of course this nation is a shithole. One voter named Corey told me he hoped Trump would help America “get back to the way it was,” a refrain I heard from a lot of people, as if the country was a rock band that had changed its sound. Backing Trump means acknowledging that you live in a world of failure, and that your last best hope is the Music Man moseying into town.

Now, here is how Donald Trump says he will Make America Great Again™. In Trump’s worldview, politics is little more than series of deals to be made. Every complex global problem, or intractable adversary, can be tamed with sufficiently hard-ass steakhouse dealmaking. He explained it all in Osky:

“I know the greatest negotiators in the world,” he said. “Now some of these people are horrible human beings. You wouldn’t have them to dinner. They’re vicious. They’re crude. They’re unhappy. They treat everybody badly. Who cares? I want them negotiating against China. Think of Carl Icahn, a friend of mine. He’d be great. I’d say, ‘Carl, take China’.”

Now, people applauded this, which alarmed me because (A) Who has friends like this? And (B) Sending a vicious, crude, unhappy person who treats everyone badly to go yell FUCK YOU at the Chinese strikes me as unwise.

But Trump is so certain, so supremely confident, that everyone at his rallies go for the idea anyway. It comes off as an act of counterintuitive genius. What’s not to like about the idea that you can fix everything by just marching into Washington and yelling at all the dummies to stop being dummies? I wish politics were that simple. I really do. Politics should be that simple. Trump’s gift is that he really can make it sound that easy, even when it’s all a huge lie. His swagger is your swagger. He can reduce entire countries down to a cardboard persona. He’ll get tough with Mexico. He’ll have Carl take China. The way Trump explains it, you’d think China had only one person in it.

Trump is so certain of his horseshit that, on that stage in Osky, he laid out a remarkable future scenario of him in the Oval Office that was essentially one enormous lie that hasn’t had the chance to become a lie yet. Here now is what President Trump would do if Ford tried to build a manufacturing plant down in Mexico:

“It’s so easy. It’s too easy. I do it with a phone call. I call the head of Ford, and I say, ‘Every single car and truck that comes into the US, we’re going to tax you 35 percent’.”

Massive applause! Trump wasn’t done.

“So this isn’t 99.9 percent—this is one hundred percent what’s going to happen: He’ll call me back, probably that afternoon, but he may play it tough and call me back the next day. The next day I’ll get a call from Ben Ford”—NOTE: there is no Ben Ford; I assume he meant Bill—“and he’ll say, ‘Mr. President, we decided not to build that plant. We’ll build it in the United States.’”

And everyone in the joint bought it! They damn near broke their hands clapping for this idea! I almost bought it myself! At least, I did for half a second before I thought, Wait, don’t you need Congress to approve shit like that? And wouldn’t forcing the plant to be built here increase the cost of Fords? And then wouldn’t people stop buying Fords? And then wouldn’t Ford go belly up, costing us even MORE jobs than if we had just left the goddamn plant in Mexico? And what about the many, many Fords that are already produced in Mexico?

But a Trump rally isn’t about thinking more than half a second ahead. There is a first BOLD step, and then you are left to assume that everything else will fall neatly into place. In Trump’s white-trash, Louis XIV universe, all you see is the pretty gold paint before it starts chipping off the walls.

Money, ironically, is what will likely wind up being Trump’s political downfall. Once the primary field has been winnowed down to a few schlubs, the GOP establishment will dump its funds into a single candidate with the goal of overtaking Trump, whom they all despise. (Yet one more reason why voters here love him, by the way.) And as rich Trump may claim to be, there are limits to how much of his personal fortune he’ll spend on this effort.

Once the GOP muscles him out, Trump may very well run a third-party campaign that divides conservative voters and all but hands the 2016 election to a waiting Hillary Clinton. In Osky, this was every thinking Trump voter’s nightmare scenario. “As long as he doesn’t split parties, I’m there,” one attendee told me. “If he does that, it’s too important of an election.” But it could happen. And if it does, Trump may go from the darling of far-right conservatives voters to their most-hated nemesis.

At the end of Trump’s speech, “We’re Not Gonna Take It” by Twisted Sister boomed through the speakers and played him off the stage. The crowd grave him a standing O on his way out. The ride was over. The reviews outside were glowing: “Awesome.” “I loved his demeanor.” “Solutions.” “It’s nice to hear somebody talk who’s not a politician.” They were all sold. They were all going to home to preach the gospel of their King Midas.