Same-sex marriage: Yes and No voters in Ireland offer lessons for Australian debate

Updated

It's been more than two years since Ireland voted by a large majority to legalise same-sex marriage, becoming the first nation to do so in a referendum.

The issue has now disappeared from the public and political arena in the country but many former Yes and No voters are once again taking an interest in the debate, thanks largely to what's happening Down Under.

Both sides say Australians can learn from the Irish experience ahead of the Turnbull Government's voluntary non-binding postal survey.

The view of Yes voters

Rory O'Neill is probably Ireland's best-known drag queen.

He tours the world under the stage name Panti Bliss and wants to see same-sex marriage introduced by any means possible.

But he claims Australia's method is one of the silliest ideas he's heard of.

"With all the love in my heart for Australia, I think you're absolute idiots," the gay rights campaigner tells me in his bar in central Dublin.

"Surveys, plebiscites or referendums are a bad way to go about it — they're stressful, they're hurtful, people say a lot of horrible, homophobic things and your one isn't even binding, so what's the point?

"In our case, we had no choice, we had to change the constitution. You guys don't need to go through any of that. The politicians could sort it out now."

But he, and a number of other activists, believe the Yes campaign will be successful if it focuses on telling undecided voters "the personal stories" of LGBTI people and gets Australians "to take a fleeting look at what's happened elsewhere".

"All of the stuff opponents of marriage equality threaten have never happened," Mr O'Neill says.

"We're in Dublin, the sky is still up there, the gays aren't wandering around through baby supermarkets dragging babies off shelves, everything is fine."

Cupcake maker Graham Herterich and his husband Daithi Kelleher understand why people have concerns about a national same-sex marriage campaign.

But they say the result of the Irish referendum proved most of the country support their relationship — the Yes campaign won 62 per cent of the vote, meaning accusations same-sex marriage was only the work of the political elite hold little water.

"The debate [in Australia] is pretty much the same as it was here," Mr Herterich says.

"Campaigners should explain to people what a Yes vote will mean to them, and they will win a lot of undecided people over and convince people to actually take part.

"The day we went to cast our vote … we were extremely emotional, we gave each other a hug, after that we were walking down the street, a woman came running after us and she was like, 'Oh my God I was going in to vote No and now I've decided to vote Yes'."

The view of No voters

On the other side of the debate in Ireland — a country once dominated by the Catholic Church — are religious figures like Vincent Twomey, a priest who studied under Pope Benedict.

"The referendum in Ireland was on the whole a very negative experience," he says.

"Overall the media was unbalanced in its coverage."

"People are affected by the drip, drip, drip of support for a particular issue … and there was a lot of intimidation".

He believes the odds are "heavily" stacked against No campaigners in Western countries across the globe and claims concerns about children and the future of the family unit are often too quickly dismissed.

"We were involved in trying to argue this on reasonable grounds; it didn't work," Father Twomey says.

"I think at this stage, considering the culture of the Anglo-Saxon world … the time has come to very simply say that 'this is not God's will'.

"Now [church leaders] will be called bigoted and all the rest of it, but they have to take that on the chin. Marriage between a man and a woman was what god intended to make us happy. Anything that deviates from nature, from the norm, cannot be good in the long-run."

Father Twomey and several other opponents of same-sex marriage in Ireland believe the campaign is only part of a broader push to diminish the role of God in public life.

"[The abuse scandals] the church has gone through is partly to blame and also partly to blame is the fact that God has been forgotten," Father Twomey says.

The prediction from Ireland?

The vast majority of Yes and No voters the ABC met in Ireland expect same-sex marriage to become law in Australia soon.

"I was actually initially surprised to learn it wasn't already legal," Mr Herterich says.

"I thought we would have been more backwards on social issues."

Many here will be watching the campaign and survey result with interest, assuming it survives the High Court challenge.

"I'm not anxious, I'm not pessimistic, these things happen, these things come and go," Father Twomey says.

"The effects will only be seen in the long-term. When you redefine marriage, you redefine nature to a certain extent and that of course is very dangerous."

Topics: government-and-politics, federal-government, electoral-system, gays-and-lesbians, community-and-society, marriage, australia, ireland

First posted