Whether you’re joining our Turkey Trot Throwdown or just want the benefits running provides, you probably have some questions about how, exactly, you “become” a runner, beyond putting on shoes and going outside. Fortunately, we have answers, and now’s the best time to start.



Choose Your Shoes

The first time you head out for a run, don’t overthink your shoes. Any old sneakers can carry you a few miles, as long as they’re reasonably comfortable. It’s okay to plan a short loop—running around the block, for example—if you want to make sure you can bail if your shoes turn out to be uncomfortable.

Advertisement

As you get into the habit of running, you’ll want to buy a pair of shoes that you don’t use for anything else. While there are lots of different types of running shoes at all price points, and just as many opinions on who should wear what, the bottom line is this: whatever feels good when you run is the right shoe to wear.

To maximize your chances of finding the perfect shoes, go to a store that specializes in running—not athletics in general, but running. Fleet Feet is one chain, and there are plenty of independent running stores too. The best thing about running stores is that most will accept returns even if you’ve run a few miles and decided the shoes you bought aren’t for you.

How I Found the Perfect Running Shoes I have a favorite model of running shoe. I buy it whenever it’s on sale, and no matter what is on… Read more

Pick Out Your Clothes

As with shoes, your best beginner’s gear is whatever you already have. Grab comfortable workout clothes, say shorts and a tank top if the weather is warm. On a cool day, you might want leggings or sweatpants along with a long sleeved t-shirt. In the rain, add a baseball cap. In general, you’ll want to dress on the cooler side so you’ll be comfortable once your body heats up. This tool from Runner’s World can help you figure out the perfect outfit.

When you’re ready to buy clothes specifically for running, make sure you have two outfits (so you don’t have to do laundry every time you run) and aim for comfortable clothes in synthetic fabrics that don’t collect sweat. You can pay a ton for high quality workout gear, but there are great bargains to be had at discount stores. And if you’ve grabbed something from the back of your closet that seems to be working just fine, there’s no need to replace it if it keeps you happy. Don’t overcomplicate your clothes, despite what athletic gear marketing may tell you that you need.

If your anatomy requires a sports bra, be aware that this can be a tricky thing to shop for. The same bra that works fine for yoga or cycling may not be up to the task (unless you add an extra support band). We have a few picks for the best sports bras, starting with the Brooks (formerly Moving Comfort) Fiona. In general, look for a wide band and wide straps, full coverage cups, and a snug fit.

Plan Your Route

In theory, you can run anywhere. In the real world, though, not everyone has a perfect running route just outside their door. If you live in a city, check out our tips for safe urban running. And if you love nature, find some trails and enjoy their beauty and unique challenges.

The Beginner's Guide to Safe Urban Running Running in the heart of a metropolitan city can be a lot different than running in a quiet… Read more

You can also get a workout without roaming. Schools often have a running track that is open to the public at least some of the time; it’s perfect for intervals and other speedwork. And if you have access to a gym, don’t forget the treadmill. It can get boring, but mental tricks like quarter-mile checkpoints can help to keep your attention until you finish your run. Treadmills are great in bad weather, and parents take note: it’s a lot easier to drop your kids off at the gym’s babysitting room than to find a way to drag them with you on an outdoor route.

Keep Track of Your Progress

Smartphone apps are probably the easiest way to keep tabs on how much running you do, and how far and fast you run each workout. Just start up the app of your choice, like Runkeeper (a longtime Lifehacker favorite) or Nike+ Run Club (which I personally prefer). Ask your friends what they use, since half the fun is sharing your progress with others.

On the other hand, you may prefer a lower tech approach. A stopwatch and a paper diary can help keep your focus on the numbers that matter most to you, rather than the numbers that are easiest for apps to track. Try our bullet journal-compatible layout for an easy way to see your progress at a glance.

Make It a Habit

Your first few runs should be focused on just surviving with a smile. Once you start to build a habit, though, it helps to set some clear goals for yourself, and pick out a plan that will help you get there.

As you progress on your running journey, you’ll want to practice running fast, learn the importance of running slow, and consider when you might be ready to run your first race. They’ll come in time, so don’t rush them, but they’re all great challenges.

Making sure you stay safe is also important. Your legs take thousands of steps even on a short run, and all that repetition adds up. Runners are prone to overuse injuries if we run too much before our bodies are ready for it. The rule of thumb is to increase your weekly mileage by no more than 10 percent at a time. For example, going from 10 miles last week to 11 miles this week is fine, but 10 to 20 is asking for trouble. In truth, you don’t have to be super strict about the exact percentage, but make sure that you work your way up little by little.