Your Horoscope by Susan Miller

Dear Pisces, you have been through a truly difficult month last month, for the full moon of April 10 may have brought you devastating sudden news, a most likely about money. Jupiter was nearby, so you likely put a bandage on the problem, but you are still picking up the pieces as you enter May. I am happy to tell you that May will be a much more positive, supportive month for you, and later in your report, I will give you specific dates and reasons you should be optimistic about your earning power as you move forward.

No doubt April was challenging. On top of that monstrous full moon, Mercury was not helping things by being retrograde from April 9 until now, but will turn direct on May 3. Mercury was in your second house of earned income, and being retrograde, it may have felt as though you kept seeing money go out, not come in. Payments due to you may have been late, or you may have been subject to accounting errors or having to deal with company or client budgetary cutbacks.

Venus was also retrograde, and through a twist of fate, Venus was the ruler of your eighth house of other people’s money, ruling taxes, insurance payouts, commissions, bonuses, royalties, licensing fees, divorce settlement, child support, credit cards, student loans and bank loans, mortgage, and so forth. Problems may have cropped up in this area too, so as you see, both your financial houses were under attack. Venus went direct on April 15, but all planets, including Venus and Mercury, need time to normalize their orbits when turning to direct.

Venus will be back to top form on May 18, and Mercury will be back to strong orbit on May 20. It is interesting that these dates fall so close to each other at the same time of the month.

You won’t have to wait that long to start actions if you have nothing pressing on the agenda. If you do, however, such as to open a new business, launch a new product, begin a new publicity or advertising campaign, or do something else that will be costly and vital to your future, you might want to wait. In terms of working on your appearance, if you hope to have new and untried dermatological treatments or to have plastic surgery, then wait until May 20 or choose any days beyond. If you want to buy an inexpensive electronic item, do so as early as May 7, but if you are buying a car, expensive computer, or costly smart phone, try to wait until May 20.

In terms of Venus, you can have a new haircut as soon as May 7, but if you are going into the operating room for plastic surgery, or trying an experimental dermatological treatment, by all means wait until Venus is in top form, May 18 and beyond. I particularly like July for you, because Venus will be in Taurus, a sign that blends well with yours, from June 6 to July 4.

As you begin the beautiful month of May, you may be thinking of a short trip you will be making soon, and putting the final details together before you go. Or, you may be thinking about a writing, speaking, editing, translation, or research project. The new moon of April 26 last month was in Taurus, 6 degrees, and started you to think about these topics. I say that because your third house of communication and travel was lit, and typically a new moon opens the door to at least one new opportunity.

As you begin the first week of May, normally it would be the right time to start a writing project, such as for a book, or to shape a monthly column for a new client; however, there may be a reason you would hold back a bit. That new moon of April 26 was in Taurus. The sign ruling Taurus is Venus, and Venus was having an argument with Saturn, and the mathematics were tight. This suggested that you faced an obstacle in terms of that communications / travel project that had to be worked out first. Saturn is currently in your tenth house of honors, awards, and achievement and Venus was in your earned income house – you may not be happy with the financial compensation and will need to negotiate further. As you begin May, you seem to still be thinking about that situation and how to fix it.

Daily Astrology Zone With our new subscription service you get forecasts for your sign each day of the year from the top astrologer in the world. Subscribe Now »