Something like 50% of people don’t read a single book after school.

Many of these people were “smart” in school.

Here’s the thing about “smart” people. They get used to understanding things. They do well in school. They are praised by everyone. Once they reach the open market, advantages suddenly disappear. Not because they are incapable, but because they are lazy.

Thank god I’m not very smart.

Instead, I cheat. I read the things smart people write down. By deciding to read more, you’ve already become smarter than most “smart people.”

For the most part, I cheat by reading in these 4 areas:

1 — MONEY

It doesn’t really matter whose book you read. People get dogmatic about this, but for basic finance, most best sellers say the same thing.

Read a book or two, and get a plan. Money isn’t everything, but money management is

I’ve been broke. It sucks. Read about how to not be broke.

2 — READ ABOUT BUSINESS

Doesn’t matter your career. Learn about how business work. Learn about why businesses work. Learn how to change a business that is not going well. Learn how to start a business from scratch.

Here are my favorites:

Made to Stick and Switch by Chip and Dan Heath

Entreleadership by Dave Ramsey

Blink by Malcolm Gladwell

The Rich Employee by James Altucher

The Creative’s Curse by me :)

3 — READ ABOUT LIFE

Okay so admittedly everything could have gone under this heading so I guess it could more accurately be called “read about human nature”

Understanding the human condition is huge for both your own survival and your relationships.

Try these:

The 5 Love Languages by Gary Chapman

Decisive by Chip and Dan Heath

The Power of Habit by Charles Duhigg

David and Goliath by Malcolm Gladwell

Love Does by Bob Goff

A Million Miles by Donald Miller

4 — READ ABOUT HEALTH

In 2014, my gut was deteriorating inside me. I had trouble walking, standing, sitting, and breathing. At 24, my doctor told me “you’ll probably just have to deal with it.”

Nobody cares about your health. Not even doctors. They just assume you’ll be fine until you display symptoms worthy of their great talent. Which is okay. That is what they are trained to do.

You and only you are responsible for keeping yourself well.

Start with: