He laughed and rubbed his hands above the flames, which — liquid in their movement and coupled with the July heat — made the earth and horizon hazy.

It was Sam’s good-natured attitude I liked most, his conviction that we could keep the fire going despite the threat of rain. He was a carpenter, working for a few months on a job in town. For the workweek he lived at this campsite, preferring it to a cheap motel, because he said he liked to return home from a long day and peel off his T-shirt and jeans and float in the Iowa River, catching catfish he would later cook over an open fire.

On weekends he drove two hours north to his hometown, where he crashed on the couch at his mother’s house. While I had the inkling there was more to his story than that, he was kind and his lips were big and I liked his all-encompassing smile.

I remember thinking, “This is not how it happens.”

For years I had dated men who impressed me on paper with their graduate degrees and Fulbright years. But in person, over drinks or dinner, I had found them boring, shortsighted, selfish or pretentious. And, to be fair, they seemed less attracted to me as a person than to the idea of what I might provide: the achievements we would share between us.

Sam wanted to know if I had noticed the cranes hovering high above the river in town. Beneath them was where he worked, he said, and I should come by in late morning; he would love to take me to lunch.

We had been talking and burning documents for about an hour when we heard thunder. The park ranger appeared to tell us two strong weather fronts were colliding just north of us that had the potential to produce tornadoes. His second warning came 20 minutes later, after lightning cracked violently through the trees.

My friend and I talked about leaving, and when we asked Sam what he would do, he shrugged and said he had nowhere else to go, joking about how he could keep the fire going in our absence. After all, he said, laughing, there were still bratwursts, a can of beans and some corn to be eaten.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

We waited with our gaze on the horizon, laughing nervously. But when the third warning came, with the ranger rushing up, throwing his S.U.V. into park and yelling that we should really heed his warning, I panicked and told Sam he should stay with me for the night. I had a couch, and as long as he promised he was not a murderer, he was welcome to stay.

Photo

“Me?” he asked, laughing. “You’re the one telling me to come with you.” He wouldn’t kill me, he promised, as long as I didn’t kill him, either.

I wanted to ensure that Sam would see tomorrow. The storms that rip through Iowa are a threat I know to take seriously. But I also wanted his company, which was simple and unrefined and the most pleasant thing I had known in years.

Later we watched from the window of my apartment as lightning lit up the sky. Sam had transported the bratwursts, still hot from the fire, on his lap, and we brought the beer, too. An hour later the Weather Service canceled the tornado warning, and yet I didn’t want him to leave.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“A storm could still pop up,” I said.

He shifted his place on the sofa. The problem was, there was only one bed, and the couch was really a love seat, too small to comfortably hold anyone.

He knew this, I imagine, which is why when he said nothing, I said: “Nothing is going to happen. I don’t even want anything to happen. I just want to know you better.”

What followed were many hours of sharing lives. Come morning, Sam would return to work and then to his stormed-out campsite, and in two weeks I would be leaving town on assignment in Alaska and then would begin a new job hours east of here. Because our time together was temporary, we were allowed a more honest communication than I had ever had with another person.

I asked Sam whatever I wanted and he answered. I asked what he was most afraid of, why he had dropped out of college, why he was living in a campsite and on relatives’ couches. I listened as he confided that his live-in girlfriend of three years had cheated on him repeatedly over many months, how he had packed his bags and left, how he preferred a campsite to her house of lies. And anyway, how long had it been, he asked, since I had seen a sunrise from the screened-in window of a tent?

“It’s so beautiful,” he said.

In the morning, Sam left well before dawn, before I woke, but we met up nearly every night for those two weeks before I left. We talked and drank cheap beer and I showed him my favorite parts of the city. And while my friends worried that I was getting too involved and that I would attach my hopes of a loving future to Sam — it seemed the most sense love had ever made.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Maybe he was the one, I argued, and maybe I had been trying too hard all those years. To friends and family who would listen, I reveled about this man I had saved from the threat of a tornado (I didn’t mention none ever hit) and how in return he had shown me a love that was sweet and unadulterated. It was an easy narrative to construct.

Sam was not, it turns out, the one. When I flew to Alaska to resume the life I had planned, I felt surprisingly devastated, and I feared the life I had always wanted now seemed to be in direct conflict with what seemed most right. What if my life was best spent in Iowa? What if I was meant to marry the man who lived in a tent?

It was my letter-burning friend who suggested it was all a matter of perspective, who suggested that Sam, while perhaps not my ultimate destination, was the romantic layover I had spent years badly needing.

“Isn’t it possible,” she asked, “that the role he played in your life was to remind you how love is good?”

Instead of trying to squeeze something more from my experience with Sam, she said I should try to accept the relationship for what it was: a valuable encounter that didn’t make Sam any less important to me, just not more important than he had really been.

I chose to believe her. In Alaska I met a man I somehow know I will marry in these next few years. He is kind, big-hearted and teaches third graders for a living. In the pictures he sends me from work, he is cutting gears out of cardboard to tack to a bulletin board along with the words, “Gearing Up for Fall.”

It’s true, Sam wasn’t the one. But he helped me rediscover that there are hundreds or perhaps thousands of people we can choose, and that love is not a product of waiting, of being patient, but is instead a rest stop, perhaps one of many, where we decide, for however long, to stay.