3d Street Art, often known as 3d chalk art is 2-dimensional artwork drawn on the street itself that gives you a 3-dimensional optical illusion from a certain perspective. It can be very breathtaking, realistic and at the same time captivating once you get the angle correct. And creating one is certainly through and challenging as you are creating a realistic 3d view out of a 2d painting.

3d street art are gaining much popularity these days. Notable brands are already taking advantage of public’s curiosity on 3D street paintings to create awareness for their products. You’ll see some later in the post. In today’s post, I’d like to show you some of the really stunning 3d Street art that I’ve came across and I think you’ll like them too. Full list after jump.

Hot river. Nearly the whole street were taken to create this earth cracking effect. Brilliant piece of art! (via Edgar Mueller)

Ice abyss. Watch out to not fall in this huge ice abyss! (via Edgar Mueller)

Raft. Now that the street is flooded, raft is your only resort to get to the other side. (via Edgar Mueller)

Johnnie Walker in Taipei. Underworld of Johnnie Walker. (via Manfred Stader)

Mysterious cave. You don’t have to travel around around the world exploring mysterious caves – somtimes they are just under you. (via Edgar Mueller)

Reflection. People on the upper part of the image is real but their reflection on the bottom part of the image is drawn. (via Kurt Wenner)

Melstorm. And here comes the vortex! (via Kurt Wenner)

Muses. This drawing looks like an old, classic painting, similar to paintings in medieval castles. (via Kurt Wenner)

Hole. Another drawing which shows what happens under the street. (via Kurt Wenner)

Relaxing giant. A huge giant relaxing on the street. (via Kurt Wenner)

Horses. It’s a cowboy show, yee-haw! (via Kurt Wenner)

Office stress. This drawing represents daily life of a typical office, maybe? (via Kurt Wenner)

Crazy river. Just hold on and here we go… Oh snap, I didn’t see that crock down the river! (via Julian Beever)

Escalator. Escalator from the underground. This looks very realistic! (via Manfred Stader)

Grant’s. Ice cold 3D chalk drawing for “Grant’s”. (via Manfred Stader)

Smart. This is very big, shiny drawing which is made for “Smart”. (via Manfred Stader)

Nails. Ouch, this hurts! (via Manfred Stader)

Asian Paints – Mumbai. What’s this? It’s a colour waterfall! (via Manfred Stader)

EasyJet – Edinburg. So it’s possible to kick back at a beach, in the middle of a city. (via Manfred Stader)

Hot bath. And here we have a hot bath which is open for everyone! (via Manfred Stader)

Costa – Covent Garden. A really realistic cup of cappuccino. (via Manfred Stader)

Ford Mexico. (via Manfred Stader)

T-Com. (via Manfred Stader)

Orange. Beautiful underworld by Orange. (via Manfred Stader)

3D Shark. (via Manfred Stader)

HDI. Be careful where you park your car. (via Manfred Stader)

Treuhaus. 3D chalk drawing can also be on the wall. (via Manfred Stader)

A fair in cologne. (via Manfred Stader)

Alice In Wonderland. Where fantasy meets reality. (via Manfred Stader)

Pfizer. (via Manfred Stader)

Bukaresti – Romania 2009. Watch out for the crashing in car, or should it be crasing up. (via Manfred Stader)

The world’s biggest fly. World’s biggest fly meets world smallest fly-spray. (via Julian Beever)

Batman and Robin to the rescue. (via Julian Beever)

Waste of water. (via Julian Beever)

Eiffel Tower Sand-Sculpture. Artificial Eiffel Tower built using sand. (via Julian Beever)

Self-portrait of artist with liquid refreshment. He has drawn himself! (via Julian Beever)

Treasures. Found a treasure in the center of the city! (via Julian Beever)

Hang on!. That’s right, the help is on its way. (via Julian Beever)

Spiderman. (via Julian Beever)

Taking the plunge. Ready, get set, jump! (via Julian Beever)

Waterfall. (via Julian Beever)

Heaven. It seems like we have a heaven beneath us too. (via Tracy Lee Stum)

Train. Here comes the underground train! (via Tracy Lee Stum)

Water In The Way. How should I cross this? Tough question. (via Tracy Lee Stum)

Escape of the mummy. Mummy is climbing out of underground! (via Tracy Lee Stum)

Temple of the jaguar. (via Tracy Lee Stum)

The Medici Garden. (via Tracy Lee Stum)

Drawn Basketball Optical Illusion. Someone should take that ball of the street, or maybe not. (via Greg Lehman)

Lizards. Animals from the underground. (via Gregor Wosik)

Jack Daniels. (via Gregor Wosik)