When I stepped aside to make room for Marsh again, I struggled to unite the two perspectives; it felt as if I were on two different levels of reality at the same time, as when I walked in my sleep, and dream and reality struggled for ascendancy. I had looked into a room, unlike any other, and when I lifted my gaze, that room was inside Hasanaj’s brain, who lay staring straight ahead under the drape in the larger room, filled with doctors and nurses and machines and equipment, and beyond that room there was an even larger room, warm and dusty and made of asphalt and concrete, beneath a chain of green mountains and a blue sky.

All those rooms were gathered in my own brain, which looked exactly like Hasanaj’s, a wet, gleaming, walnutlike lump, composed of 100 billion brain cells so tiny and so myriad they could only be compared to the stars of a galaxy. And yet what they formed was flesh, and the processes they harbored were simple and primitive, regulated by various chemical substances and powered by electricity. How could it contain these images of the world? How could thoughts arise within this hunk of flesh?

Marsh stopped and brought out the stimulator again and inserted it into the hole.

Dashi said something to Hasanaj, who replied briefly.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Nothing,” Dashi said.

Marsh stimulated the bottom again.

“Nothing.”

“Nothing.”

“Left arm, face.”

“Left arm and face?”

“Yes.”

“Then we’ll stop here.”

Marsh took a few steps back, and the microscope was wheeled away. His eyes, the only part of his face I could see, looked happy.

Xhumari and Petrela took over, and Marsh, after telling Hasanaj that the operation had been successful, left the operating room.

I went over to Hasanaj and bent down to him. He looked tired, his eyes were narrow, his face expressionless.

“How do you feel?” I asked.

Hasanaj smiled and raised his thumb.

Dashi laughed. His back was completely wet with sweat.

After the operation, which lasted nearly three hours, we drove to a park just outside the city center, where there was a rustic restaurant built of brown-stained timber, with waiters dressed in traditional costumes, where we had lunch. The temperature was 95 degrees, the cicadas were singing, all the greenery surrounding us was lit up by the golden rays of the blazing sun. Everyone was in a good mood, especially Marsh. There was a new levity about him, and he seemed more open. Not that he seemed closed before, but the shadow that I had sensed in him was gone.

I was happy, too. The sight of the mountains behind the city, so green and haughty, lifted my spirits, and the sight of the brain, its physiological aspect — the ragged edges of skull within which it had pulsated, the streaming red blood — was also pleasant to think about, for the bright colors within connected the landscape of the brain to the grass that grew beneath the veranda we were sitting on and the trees rustling faintly and nearly inaudibly in the breeze, and what that brain contained, all those images and thoughts that could never be separated from their material state, connected it nonetheless to the city beneath us, so full of dreams, longings, hopes and imaginings.

That the same city was also full of illness and want, tragedy and death, was something I didn’t stop to consider, nor the fact that the brains I had seen had been diseased. The operation had been successful, the tension had been released. All I could see was life and the living.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The next morning we went on an excursion to the port of Durres and to Berat, a town in the mountains. Even though we had spent only three days together, it seemed as if we had known each other for years. Marsh explained the architecture of the brain to me, and the way it functioned. He explained how they reached tumors that were lodged deep in the brain, which is, very loosely speaking, crumpled up like a sheet of paper, and therefore full of folds and ravines that you can push aside and move through. There are also so-called silent areas, which could be cut without damaging any of the brain’s functions. He told me about times when things had gone wrong, and the patient had died on the operating table in front of him. “I have killed people,” he said.

He told me about difficult operations that had succeeded and about the euphoria they produced. He said that 50 percent of surgery was visual, what you saw, and 50 percent was tactile, what you could touch. He said that brain surgery was a craft. To become good at it, you had to practice and sometimes make mistakes, in a profession where mistakes were fatal and impermissible. If your child has a brain tumor, you want the best surgeon. But to become the best, which is merely a question of gaining experience, you must first have operated on children without having experience, and what do you tell the parents then? That their child is important to the future of the young and as-yet-untested neurosurgeon?

He talked for a while about the particularities of operating on children. The tissues are soft and beautiful, very different from those of older people. A child is as fresh and clean on the inside as on the outside. But the problem with blood loss is very great; they can lose a life-threatening amount of blood very quickly. And the desperate anxiety of the parents is a heavy burden to carry. But for the children themselves, it’s easy. If they’re not in pain, they’re happy. They don’t have any existential perspective. He talked about his father, who was a law professor at Oxford University, and about his mother, who came to Britain as a refugee from Nazi Germany before the war, and how they both helped form what is now Amnesty International. He talked about his youth, about how shy he was, how he sat at home reading books when everyone else went out, how he never went to nightclubs, never spent time with girls. He told me about a breakdown he had as a young man, when he fell into a deep depression and spent some time in the psychiatric ward of a hospital. He told me he wrote poetry at that time, inspired by Sylvia Plath. He told me that the medical profession he had chosen seemed safe to him, something to buoy him. He told me about his relationship to his siblings and to his own children. “I competed with my children,” he said, grimacing at the recollection. “Can you imagine? I always wanted to show them how clever I was. That’s one of the worst things you can do to children.” He told me how his first marriage ended, and what his present marriage was like.

He was entirely open but not confessional; it was more that all our conversations seemed to lead to more serious matters, almost regardless of where they began, perhaps because the situations that gave rise to them were so concentrated and involved life and death, and because the places where they occurred were closed to us in a way, amid an alien culture, and yet in another sense, so open: Sitting on a terrace on the seventh floor, surrounded by dark blue sea extending in all directions, glittering in the sunlight, a few tiny people wading through the green shallows, maybe 50 yards out, the slightly lighter blue sky arching above us. Standing in an old Orthodox stone church in the mountains, in front of a row of icons on the wall, in radiant colors, gold, red, blue, beneath a dome with three circular holes that the light sifted down through. Sitting in a car whizzing through the darkness of the Albanian countryside after a long day in the sun. Walking through the heart of Tirana one afternoon, in small, narrow streets that lay in deep silence, past dilapidated houses and walls, with improvised electrical wiring, makeshift home extensions and dirty children playing in back alleys, just a few hundred yards from the main boulevards. Several times, when he mentioned something private, I reminded him that I was going to write about him. “You do realize that I might write about what you just told me?” He just smiled and said that was his strategy: The more personal he got, the more likely it was that I would like him and therefore write favorably about him.

The only time I saw Marsh angry was on the morning before the second operation. He had planned on seeing the patient, only to be informed by Petrela that she was already in the operating room and was having her head cut open.

“Damn,” he said loudly, stamping his foot and striking out at the air with his hand.

“You could see her tomorrow morning, before the operation,” Petrela said.

“O.K., that’ll have to do,” Marsh said calmly, but his eyes were still angry. Instead, he and Petrela went to see how Hasanaj was doing. I came along. Petrela pushed the button by the elevator at the end of the corridor and told us that when the king died, or rather, the king’s son, his heir apparent, the body had been brought to this hospital, and when it was taken out again, they had used this elevator. The elevator stopped between two floors, with the dead king inside, and it took them two hours to restart it.

The doors opened, and we got in.

“It’s one thing to get stuck in an elevator with a corpse,” Marsh said. “Quite another when the corpse belongs to the king.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Hasanaj was alone in a room on the third floor, sitting half upright in bed, supported by pillows, with the entire upper part of his head swathed in bandages. His face lit up when he saw Marsh and Petrela. But there was something faintly grotesque about his smile, because one side of his face was paralyzed, and his mouth seemed to droop a little, so that it was more like a grimace than a smile. Marsh told him that he had a temporary weakness on one side, that this was quite normal, and that it would get better quickly. Hasanaj nodded, he understood, and he made the grimace again, and laughed feebly, with eyes that shone.

I met the second patient the next day. Her name was Gjinovefa Merxira, and she was 21. She grew up in Burrel, a small town of 15,000 in northern Albania, and moved to Tirana to study medicine, she told me, lying in a hospital bed. Her eyes were brown, her face was broad, her features were pure and young. I asked her to tell me about her very first seizure. She said she had her first fit when she was 7. It was wintertime, she was ice-skating with her friends, and she collapsed. She saw her friends as if through a fog. When she got home, she didn’t recognize her mother. She looked straight at her mother, and she didn’t recognize her. Her mother asked, “Why are you staring at me?” and Merxira said she wasn’t staring at her, and then she began to cry. She was 7, and she had a terrible headache, but no one thought that anything was seriously wrong with her.

She had fits like that once or twice a year. One time, when she was watching TV, the letters of the subtitles began to move out of the TV and into the room where she was sitting. Another time she saw a fire in a garden, a big fire, and she was about to cry for help when it vanished. With these fits came headaches, nightmares, occasional numbness. Sometimes every noise sounded like the chiming of bells. Because the fits were always of the same intensity and occurred seldom but regularly, she didn’t think it was anything serious. She didn’t see a doctor until after an incident that happened when she was 17. She was taking a math exam at school and saw flowers instead of numbers. She started to cry. She wanted to do well at her exam, but she couldn’t do the calculations, because all she could see were flowers, in black and white. That’s when she visited the hospital. They examined her, but found nothing, gave her medication for her fits and sent her home.

In November 2014, she was sitting at a cafe in Tirana with some friends and saw things floating above the table. When she got home, she couldn’t see anything on her left side, and her friends, who were very worried for her, took her to the hospital. As for her, she was calm; she knew that it would pass. This time the doctors discovered what was wrong: She had a tumor in the vision center in the brain. A decision was made to operate, but not until August, and the operation would be carried out by Henry Marsh, who now, this morning, finally stopped in front of her bed in the patients’ ward on the third floor of the hospital in Tirana.

Her head was bandaged, after her skull had been opened the previous evening, and she stared at Marsh with young, frightened eyes.

He told her more or less the same thing that he told Hasanaj: that he had carried out this operation more than 400 times; that it was practically harmless; and that she was going to be awake because it was safer, but he was a little more detailed with Merxira than with Hasanaj, presumably because she was studying medicine and therefore more familiar with what was going to happen. Maybe that is also why she seemed more afraid.

Photo

When I saw her again a few hours later, with her head fixed in the clamp in the operating room, the anxiety was still there, in her eyes. She seemed to sense everything that was in the room, as if she had a relation to all of it, whereas with Hasanaj, it seemed that he held back from any encounter, that he just submitted passively to everything and made up his mind to endure it until it was all over. Pellegrin’s shooting of Hasanaj’s operation had been almost unnoticeable, just a part of all the other movements in the room, but now, because of Merxira’s vulnerability, I was increasingly aware of the camera and the flash.

The doctors attached the plastic drapes to a stand, so that her head lay beneath a small tent and the lower part of her skull was covered while the upper part was bare.

“At operations in London, the drapes are transparent,” Marsh said, “so that the surgeon can see the patient all the time.”

When her head had been swabbed and the injections of local anesthetic administered, the assistant surgeon, Arsen Seferi, began to remove the stitches. Merxira lifted her arm to her eyes and let out a low, long moan.

Dashi spoke to her, and she answered, then fell silent again.

Seferi laid the scalpel aside and began to remove the clips that ran around the skull. Soon the lid of the skull was put aside, the meninges were cut open and the brain was exposed. From a distance, the bloodstained gauze that wreathed the skull resembled flowers.

Marsh went over and studied the brain.

“Just as I thought. The surface looks normal. The tumor is underneath.” A nurse handed him a mapping device, which Marsh and the others called a GPS, and he moved it slowly over the brain while he examined the image that appeared on a monitor.

After a while he switched instruments. Now he pressed the electrical stimulator against the surface of the brain. It buzzed briefly. Dashi spoke with Merxira and said something to Marsh. He stimulated the brain again. The same electric buzz sounded. Dashi spoke again, and Marsh began to operate.

“We should feel a rubbery tumor shortly,” he said.

“Aah,” Merxira moaned.

I looked at her. She pressed her arm against her eyes again.

“We were being misled by the GPS,” Marsh said. “Oh. Here it is!”

“If you trust the GPS too much, you could end up in the cemetery,” Petrela said to me in a low voice.

“Here, you can see,” Marsh said, waving me over. “Do you see the difference?”

One area was more yellowish-gray than the other, but the difference was so subtle that I would never have noticed it if Marsh hadn’t pointed it out.

He continued hollowing out the affected area of the brain.

Merxira moaned.

Suddenly there was almost a shout in the room.

“Aah!”

“There’s no feeling in the brain,” Marsh said. “But what can hurt are the blood vessels, when they are moved or get bent. That’s what she is feeling. It can be a shocklike pain.”

He looked at Dashi.

“Is the pain bad?”

Dashi said something to Merxira, who answered him in a low voice.

“She can feel it, but it’s O.K.,” Dashi said.

A flash went off. I looked up. Pellegrin was crouching close to the wall, taking photos of the island of equipment, presumably with Merxira’s face visible beneath the green drape.

Marsh continued sucking out the tumor at the bottom of the hole. Merxira moaned. Being there was almost unbearable.

“You don’t want to damage that,” Marsh said and let me look at a blood vessel in the microscope, blue amid the folds of the brain. “If that is damaged, the blood can’t leave the head, and the brain will fill with blood.”

“How far away is it from the tumor?” I asked.

“Oh, one or two millimeters,” Marsh said.

He went on with the operation, assisted by Petrela, who squirted water on the surface. Dashi spoke with Merxira at regular intervals, asking her to look at a special eye chart and assessing Marsh’s progress based on her responses.

Marsh removed a whole piece of the tumor, which the nurse placed in a dish.

Aside from the even whisper of the sucker, the operating room had become completely silent. Marsh worked concentratedly. Only his hands were moving.

Dashi held the paper in front of Merxira again.

“Slight blurring of vision on the left,” he said.

Marsh stopped.

He lifted his head from the microscope and looked at me. “You stop when you start getting more anxious,” he said. “That’s experience.”

He bent down to Merxira and said that the operation had been successful, that everything had gone the way it was supposed to.

I hadn’t dared to speak to her during the operation. But now I went over. I wanted to ask her how she was doing, but when I saw her lying there, with her hand shielding her eyes, I said instead, in a thick voice, “You were very brave.”

Afterward, when I took off the disposable gown, the face mask and the cap on the ground floor, I felt shaky.

“Oh, man,” Pellegrin said. “It was like her mind occupied the room.”

Later that day, I went to the National Art Gallery and looked at the paintings from the Communist Era. They were hanging in two large galleries, and during the hour I spent in there, I didn’t see a single person. Occasionally I heard some children playing on the lawn outside, their shouts and laughter rose up above the even, distant hum of the city. Many of the paintings showed people at work. In one of them, what appeared to be an enormous radio tower was being hoisted into place in a barren, mountainous landscape bustling with activity, while a woman, clearly an engineer, studied some drawings and a man pointed ahead. A nation was being built; a new world was being created.

In Norway in the 1970s, Albania was considered a pioneering country by the young intellectuals. A sort of utopia, a land of the future, the ideal we should be striving toward. When I mentioned this to Petrela at our first dinner, he laid his head in his hands.

“But that was just a lie,” he said. “It was all a lie. How could they have believed it?”

“I don’t know,” I said then. But when I saw the paintings in the museum, I felt the pull from them.

The painting I looked at the longest portrayed a young, modern family. The father carried a child on his shoulders, the mother had a satchel in her hand, another child was running ahead of them. They were moving through a landscape of mountains and valleys, the grass was green, bordering on pastel, the sky was light, far up above them a helicopter hung suspended. Everyone was smiling, the adults and the children. They were headed for the future, full of joy and hope.

Everything was clear, pure, simple and forceful.

Why couldn’t the world look like that?

What was so wrong with these paintings? What was wrong with the world they portrayed?

When I came out onto the street again, the sun hung low in the sky, and the previously limpid air had dulled a little. It was faintly hazy, the way it gets in the hour before dusk. The cars on the avenue in front of me were waiting for the green light. An old, crooked woman walked between them, supporting herself on a crutch, a cup in her hand. She knocked on the window of one of the cars. Two women were sitting inside, both of them turned their heads and looked the other way, the way people have always averted their eyes from beggars. I walked into a park, toward a large complex of restaurants that lay in front of a shallow but wide pool, blue, with peeling paint. The Chinese had built the complex, Fejzo had said, and it was known locally as “Taiwan.”

I sat down in one of the few empty chairs outside and looked at people, speculating about the relationships they had to one another and to the world.

I had always considered my thoughts as something abstract, but they weren’t; they were as material as the heart beating in my chest. The same was true of the mind, the soul, the personality; all of it was fixed in the cells and originated as a result of the various ways in which these cells reacted with one another. All of our systems, too — communism, capitalism, religion, science — they also originated in electrochemical currents flowing through this three-pound lump of flesh encased in the skull.

All of which was saying nothing. It was like examining a stone in the foundation wall to find the answer to the secret of St. Peter’s Basilica.

That was all just a lie, Petrela had said about Albanian Communism.

But what wasn’t?

I had asked Marsh if he believed in God, in a life beyond death. He just shook his head. “This is it,” he said.

We use systems to keep the wolf from the door, I thought. And systems are nothing but vast complexes of notions and concepts. Everything that helps us lose sight of the petty, pathetic and meaningless parts of our own selves. That is the wolf. The awkward, twisted or stupid part of the soul, the grudges and the envy, the hopelessness and the darkness, the childish joy and the unmanageable desire. The wolf is the part of human nature that the systems have no room for, the aspect of reality that our ideas, the firmament that the brain vaults above our lives, cannot fathom. The wolf is the truth.

So why would Marsh want to keep the wolf from the door? Seen from the outside, it seemed that the role of surgeon had provided him with a larger context in which he could excel and rule over life and death, where there was no place for whatever was small and insecure in him. The role of surgeon gave meaning to his life, lifted the meaning outside of himself, into a system — it kept the wolf from the door. At the same time, that role revealed the meaninglessness of it all. Tumors grew randomly, people died randomly, every day, everywhere. You could choose to keep this from sight behind numbers, behind statistics, behind the plastic drapes that made the patients faceless. His greatness was that he didn’t hide the smallness but instead used his insight into it to fight against everything that concealed it, the institutionalization of hospitals, the dehumanization of patients, all the rituals established by the medical profession to create distance and to turn the body into something abstract, general, a part of a system.

Fejzo had told me a story he heard in London. Marsh had not mentioned it in his book, and as far as Fejzo knew, Marsh had never spoken about it — it was one of his colleagues who had told Fejzo. Marsh had operated on an infant, only a few months old, and the operation went badly; the child died on the operating table. Marsh went in to see the parents in person. He told them that he had made a mistake, and that their child had died. He cried with them. “No doctor does that,” Fejzo had said. “No one.”

It began to get dark around me. A man came pushing a stroller between the tables. A boy was sitting in it; he might have been a year and a half, and when the father sat down at a table, the boy stretched his hands out to him. The father loosened his straps, lifted him out and set him on his lap. He fooled around with him for a while, and the boy laughed.

That, too, was the truth.

Then the father lit a cigarette, took out his cellphone and began texting. The boy protested against the sudden lack of attention, and the father handed him the pack of cigarettes, which he happily began to play with, while the moon slowly rose over the rooftops, bright yellow against the blue-black sky.