Photo

GRACE

By Paul Lynch

354 pp. Little, Brown & Company. $26.

To twist a phrase from P. G. Wodehouse, it’s not difficult to tell the difference between Paul Lynch’s writing and a ray of sunshine, and “Grace,” his third novel, reveals an undiminished appetite for the depiction of suffering. Through its young heroine, we experience all the describable and indescribable horrors of the Irish famine. Lynch goes where only famished dogs should go, and it’s a measure of his skill that he keeps us with him all the same.

The novel’s plot is slight. When famine bites, a mother sends her daughter, hair shorn and dressed as a boy, away from their hut on a “rock-ribbed hill” in Donegal to find work. Eventually, the daughter returns to the family hearth, the “wee girl” now a “beautiful woman.” It’s not a happy homecoming. The characters Grace encounters along the road to nowhere aren’t astoundingly original, though they are memorable: Embury Soundpost and his “wailing river of cattle”; heroic Bart of the withered arm; rude McNutt, a man “in slow perish”; and sinister “Father” Robert Boyce, with his “prayerful face” and “serpent’s touch.”

However, plot and even character are secondary. We care about Grace and her companion, her young brother Colly, but what grips is the merging, through grief and desperation, of the dead and the living. When you’re starving, Lynch seems to be asking, are you truly alive? Without resorting to make-believe, he carefully and inexorably explores the confusion. “Grace” is a story of ghosts but it isn’t a ghost story. “Grace” is a story of the Great Famine, but it’s not narrowly political. “Grace” is a tale of misery, but it’s not a misery memoir. Lynch is a sure-footed tightrope walker.

Photo

Traditionally, as with a good musician, the mark of a good novelist is the illusion of effortlessness. Lynch doesn’t do effortless. “I’m an intuitive writer,” he has said, but he also “rewrites each sentence up to 50 times.” In “Grace,” both intuition and effort are palpable, the former sometimes lovely, as, for example, “her hand a night orchid upon the latch of his door,” and the latter sometimes labored and self-conscious: a quirky construction like “the small of her breasts” at the start of the book is wearisome by “the long of each night” near the end. “The leaves are trembling gently. The leaves are letting go their light. How the leaves release their light whispering grief to the dark and tomorrow the same of it” almost tips into a parody of Irish modernism.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yet Lynch’s lush, poetic prose deliberately and painfully acts as a foil to the reality of the famine. If only Grace could eat or burn the description of the abandoned cabin where “doorlight maps the gloom into quiet, the mud walls and the thatch sooted and so turf-smoked that the reek of how many years’ burning is marked into this place.”

And make no mistake: The poetry doesn’t prettify. We cringe at the slyness, the degradation, the whining and dehumanizing humiliation hunger drags in its wake, with men “in their slump-walk … coming slowly undone. How they look like they are losing both their inwardness and outwardness.” And then there’s Grace, “walking with a wanty hand held out.”