In every industry, there are at least a handful of experts considered authorities on the subject. Most have a blog or website, making them the premier trusted resources industry-wide. Likewise, you’ll usually find a community or two where all the professionals immersed in the field turn to when they need to converse with like-minded professionals.The same holds for the developers. Here are the Top 10 websites where every programmer should visit at least once.

Git is an open-source version control system that was started by Linus Trovalds – the same person who created Linux. GitHub is a web-based Git or version control repository and Internet hosting service. It is mostly used for code. It offers all of the distributed version control and source code management functionality of Git as well as adding its own features.

Stack Overflow is a question and answer site for professional and enthusiast programmers. It’s built and run by users as part of the Stack Exchange network of Q&A sites. With users help, working together to build a library of detailed answers to every question about programming.

Code Project (formerly The Code Project) is a community for computer programmers with articles on different topics and programming languages such as web development, software development, C++, Java, and other topics

Google Developers (previously Google Code) is Google’s site for software development tools, application programming interfaces (APIs), and technical resources. … There are APIs offered for almost all of Google’s popular consumer products, like Google Maps, YouTube, Google Apps, and others

Codecademy is an online interactive platform that offers free coding classes in 12 different programming languages including Python, Java, PHP, JavaScript, Ruby, SQL, and Sass, as well as markup languages HTML and CSS.

A Computer Science portal for geeks. It contains well written, well thought and well-explained computer science and programming articles, quizzes and much more

Code School is an online learning destination for existing and aspiring developers that teaches through entertaining content. Each course is built around a creative theme and combines gaming mechanics with video instruction and in-browser coding challenges to make learning both educational and memorable.

W3Schools is a web developers site, with tutorials and references on web development languages such as HTML, CSS, JavaScript, PHP, SQL, W3.CSS, and Bootstrap, covering most aspects of web programming. The site derives its name from the World Wide Web (W3), but is not affiliated with the W3C.

Tutorialspoint.com is a dedicated website to provide quality online education in the domains of Computer Science, Information Technology, Programming Languages, and other Engineering as well as Management subjects.

Topcoder is a company that administers contests in computer programming. Topcoder hosts fortnightly online competitive programming competitions—known as SRMs or “single round matches”—as well as weekly competitions in graphic design and development

Summary Article Name Top 10 websites for Programmers to learn coding Description Here are the top 10 websites to learn and build programs.We have listed some of the popular resources to learn programming check ouut the list for more Author Harish M Publisher Name DigitzByte Publisher Logo

Recommended