Better

All that eventually became my normal. Instead of feeling like the real me was the one who had gotten in shape before college and given way to a temporary weight gain, it felt like the years when I’d had control of my body image were an exception that I would never be able to re-create. I abandoned all hope that things would get better. I’d managed to build a reasonable career and found a level of emotional stability, but I couldn’t fathom that there would be a way for me to ever drastically improve how I looked. Instead, change came from a more familiar process and unexpectedly stuck: I got out of an unhealthy relationship and swore to work on myself out of the fear that I would otherwise have to settle for being unhappy. That happened a few times over the last decade, but this time, for whatever reason, this time, I didn’t retreat back towards my old habits.

I pieced together one healthy, productive weekend in January. I made it to the gym on consecutive days for the first time in years, even if I could barely gasp my way through a couple of abbreviated workouts. I watched and wrote through a weekend of football while my brain shrilly reminded me over and over again that it was time to feed myself shit. I’d open food delivery websites, read the menu, and close the window, or walk to the pantry to get snacks before shutting the door and walking away. I woke up Monday morning having strung together two consecutive healthy days and it felt, even for a moment, like I had found a possible way out.

Even with that modicum of success, I knowingly dismissed it as a hiccup, one that I would destroy with a bad decision within a matter of days. Thrillingly — surprising myself more than anybody else — I managed to keep it going. That weekend became a week. Then two. I hit a month and it was surreal, like I had somehow hopped into the ocean and caught a wave after ten years of getting smacked in the face by my surfboard. I was down 20 pounds and friends started noticing, which was enough to convince my brain that I couldn’t go back on even that tiny bit of progress. And now, it’s been a year and counting.

Outside the Watch the Thrones podcast taping in June with a couple of randos, 256 pounds. Got that good paunch.

As I think about what I did to actually get in shape, the actual physical choices I made are a lot less important than they might seem. I knew that a healthy adult male ate about 2,000 calories per day, so I aimed for that figure, eventually settling into a range where I tried to eat between 1,800 and 2,400 calories each day. And I began going to the gym six days a week, almost exclusively using the elliptical machine, since I didn’t think my joints could take much of a pounding after they had spent the last decade in energy saver mode.

Although I’ve adapted and expanded my knowledge and obviously developed a more robust game plan, those two simple concepts are at the core of what I’ve done all year. It was more important to show up every day and emulate that terrifyingly militaristic Tom Brady commercial than it was to worry about interval training and macronutrient ratios.

And How

Instead, other aspects of my rebuild were far more meaningful and seem wholly more important to reiterate here as advice. That starts with a point I wish I had figured out much earlier: you simply have to build a plan which works for you in lieu of copying somebody else’s. You can read a million stories of how people lost weight and drastically improved their self-image, but unless you can apply the principles of what they did to something that actually fits you, it’s almost always going to fail.

There was one piece in this vein I read quite a few times, especially when I was getting started earlier this year. HardballTalk writer Aaron Gleeman, somebody I’ve been reading since I was in high school, wrote about losing 153 pounds over a one-year stretch between 2011 and 2012. (Go read it and come back. It’s great.) When I was reading just about every Google hit for my “lose [large number] of pounds in one year” searches in January and February, it was easy to get discouraged. I’d read articles that seemed to contradict one another while expressing levels of certainty about how their process was the one true platonic ideal of how to get fit now. The simplicity of Aaron’s piece really resonated with me as a stat nerd: burn off more calories than you need to sustain your current weight and you’ll start dropping pounds.

Aaron’s story was easy to relate to, given that we are both sports bloggers with a healthy appreciation for Ma$e’s career, but his path towards losing weight — specifically eating the same meal on a daily basis — never would have worked for me. I strongly suspected that I wasn’t going to be able to diet in the way that Aaron had, so I pieced together an eating plan which vaguely resembled a far healthier version of the things I used to enjoy. Desserts were cut out altogether. Never a big drinker, I took beer out of the equation and didn’t have any alcohol in 2015. I loved wings more than I loved most family members, but I had to cut them out of my life and replace them with grilled chicken. (The one exception was when I inexplicably walked past a buffalo wing restaurant in Tokyo and genuinely thought I was hallucinating.)

With Robert Mays, a writer at grantland.com, before our live podcast on September 8. 231 pounds.

In the process, I actually began to re-program my brain into remembering how food could be enjoyable. Those wings in Tokyo were pure pleasure. I’d stopped getting pizza delivered, but I would head out to Pino’s for a slice and actually savor it in a way that simply didn’t occur when I had been eating whatever I wanted. And then, instead of shutting down at the sign of something unhealthy and gorging myself with the idea that I needed to somehow get full before correcting things the next day, I planned the rest of my eating day around that slice of pizza and made my decisions accordingly. My relationship with food evolved into a philosophy which now rings through my head on a daily basis: Don’t be a shithead.

I also found it incredibly valuable to log everything I did in a spreadsheet. In part, that’s because I’m a spreadsheet fetishist who would write longform pieces and love letters in Excel if I could. I’m not sure any of this would have actually stuck if I hadn’t started tracking what I was doing in a spreadsheet. I started really going out of my way to do so a couple of weeks into the process, and it’s been both an invaluable resource and an incredible motivator. It’s impossible to hide if you’re actually counting calories every day, and there were so many times when I stopped myself from eating something because I knew how frustrated I would be if I had to type it into Excel. And likewise, the act of getting home and recording the calories I’d burned at the gym became a weirdly satisfying conclusion to my workout.

After a couple of months, when I realized that this wasn’t just some blip of self-preservation, I built a model to estimate my weight loss, dynamically calculating my basal metabolic rate (BMR) and using a Monte Carlo simulation to predict how many calories I would take in during a typical day. Few creations have ever been simultaneously as nerdy and genuinely sad. I weighed myself far more frequently at first, when I was desperate for positive reinforcement, than I do now. At this point, I have enough data to reliably trust the process. The Sixers are a good rebuilding thing to emulate, right?

Having reliable data also allowed me to set short-term goals along the way to my long-term ideal, another thing I had hugely underestimated in years past, when I would get discouraged by the scope of what I had to accomplish and give up before even trying. This weight loss timeframe estimator wasn’t perfectly accurate, but it was a reasonable estimate and gave me hope of how quickly I could turn things around, especially at the beginning.

Some of my benchmarks were downright embarrassing. I don’t know that anybody should be as happy as I was about only weighing 300 pounds, but that was the first round number I hit. I was in Hong Kong and hopped on a scale which weighed me in kilograms and excitedly typed it into Google three or four times to make sure I hadn’t messed up the conversion. Or there was the moment a couple of weeks ago when I went into a store in Brooklyn and tried on a medium-sized sweater. Having worn a medium at my thinnest before eventually expanding all the way to XXXL shirts by the beginning of 2015, it really meant something when the sweater fit and didn’t look horrific. I started uncontrollably laughing out loud in the changing room (in part to avoid crying), which must have been incredibly confusing and a little terrifying to the tiny female employee on the other side of the door who didn’t know why this lunatic was giggling as he tried on a shirt.

More than anything, though, the lesson I learned from all of this was how incredibly important is it to forgive yourself. Once I got stuck in that downward spiral of eating poorly and not taking care of myself, it was so incredibly easy to beat myself up and dismiss all hope. It’s harder to escape, too, because during those brief moments where I felt motivated to actually try and change things, I’d feel like I needed to be perfect from then on to get out of my predicament as quickly as possible while I still had the, um, momentum. (This is awkward.) When I would inevitably screw up, it would feel like I’d failed a mission and had to start from the very beginning, and that would always lead to giving up altogether. At 25, I’d look back and wish I had done all this when I was 22, and then repeat the same cycle at 28.

It seems simple to say now, but it doesn’t have to be that way! Now, I’m just happy I didn’t wait until I was 40. It’s easy to preach about sunk costs in football, but it’s harder to actually recognize them in my own life. There have been days where I screwed up and ate like a shithead again. I’ve missed workouts. It happens. I’ve woken up the next day and gotten back on the wave. Even right now, I’m frustrated with myself because one of my biggest long-term goals was to get under 200 pounds by the end of 2015. I came up six pounds short. It’s fine. I’ll hit it sometime this month and be just as happy. Instead of being angry at myself for throwing away years of my life, I believe in myself and my ability to enact change in a way that I could not have fathomed this time last year.

And Next

Even then, I’ll be far from finished. I’d like to settle somewhere between 160 and 170 pounds, and that will take a few more months. I’d like to transition from simply trying to get thinner to really focusing on trying to be healthier, which will be a more difficult process. There’s the thorny issue of separating self-image and self-confidence from a number, an issue on which I’m making progress, but one that’s always going to be easier as I get happier with the number.

January 2. 206 pounds. Next project: figure out what I am ever doing with my hands

Compared to a year ago, though, I’m in a much better place. I’m typing this in the middle seat on a cross-country flight, which would have been hours of hell for me and my seatmates years ago. My sides and hips are not spilling against and underneath the armrests. The seatbelt — one seatbelt — fits me with room to spare. I’ll take the subway home from the airport and be able to sit down without being self-conscious, because I won’t be afraid that I’m going to take up two seats. Happiness in those sorts of public situations is the ability to be anonymous. I don’t feel any compulsion to eat something awful in the airport to tide me over during my flight or go home and order shit because I had a long day of traveling.

And honestly, I know that things are never going to be perfect, which is fine. My body’s never going to look good. Right now, it looks roughly like a chubby old man was cryogenically frozen for a decade and then thrown in the microwave to thaw out. Even if I get to the number I want, it’s going to be a life-long fight to actually keep that weight off and stay healthy. That’s how addiction works. I haven’t conquered or solved anything.

What I have managed to do is wipe away a lot of what went wrong over the last decade in the course of a year. More importantly, I feel like I’ve found a series of principles that I trust to keep me from falling into those same traps again. After years of being unable to get over my past, it’s impossibly fulfilling to feel like I actually have control over my future.