The Aquarius Woman

The Aquarius Woman: Love, Sex, Friendship, Style

The Aquarius Woman

A word of advice if you’re trying to get to grips with the Aquarius woman – don’t. You can’t bottle the four winds in a jar, or tie down the clouds. So don’t try. Don’t pin her down to a stereotype because she will more than likely buck all expectations and be exactly what you do not expect her to be. More than anything, she is the ultimate non-conformist.

Aquarius is an air sign, but unlike her other light-hearted zodiac sisters, an Aquarius woman is no gentle breeze or dreamy zephyr. She is a tempest filled with an inner force and power, which can be a little scary when you first come into contact with her. Hold on tight and go along for the ride. If you pass through the eye of the storm, you will find a smart, independent, and most of all, original woman at the heart of the hurricane.

Many Aquarians have a visionary, grand, and humanitarian approach to life.

Bursting with brilliant ideas and sizzling with intelligence, some famous Aquarius women include Zsa Zsa Gabor, Virginia Woolf, Germaine Greer, and Oprah Winfrey.

Aquarius the Water Bearer Associations

Dates: January 21-February 19

Rulers : Uranus and Saturn

Element: Air

Quality: Fixed

Color: Sky Blue or Violet Day: Saturday

Stone: Amethyst

Part of Body Ruled: Ankles and Shins

Motto: I know

Energy: Yang

*Sun sign dates are always approximate, as starting and ending dates can vary from year to year.

The Aquarius woman is quirky. She is an enigma. She is unpredictable. And independent. This is a fixed sign which means she doesn’t take kindly to people telling her what to do. But if you need help, she is a true humanitarian who is ready and willing to assist someone who might be short on cash or down on their luck. She’ll also dole out sound advice. This sign cares about her fellow man, woman, child, animal, and environmental cause.

The Aquarius woman mingles with people from all walks of life. She tends to greet and interact with people the same way, no matter what their age or background.

She likes to travel, she likes the new, but she can be curiously attached to the old. While Aquarius women love progress, on a personal level, they don’t like change. It has to do with their loyalty, their attachment to the past, and their memories, so even though they have the courage to look ahead, usually with optimism, and see the best things in store, they still like to know where they have come from and who they are.

Usually when we hear the word “loyalty” we immediately think about being loyal to our mates. While Aquarius women may very well keep their promises in their relationships, they take loyalty to a different, deeper level. This woman will stay loyal to a particular brand, restaurant, mom-and-pop shop, team, musician, and so forth, through thick and thin, unless of course they truly prove themselves unworthy. This is a rare and wonderful trait, that seems in fact to be an endangered attitude in today’s world. While Aquarians have many interests, they are not flighty by nature.

Aquarius in Love

On a mental level, many things are a game to the Aquarius woman, and nothing has bigger stakes than the game of love. Playing at her own leisure, she will place her pieces precisely, never skipping a beat or making a false move. Love is fun for an Aquarius woman, and she will take the part of many roles for her lover, just to keep things interesting. This light hearted approach does not mean an Aquarius woman falls in love easily. On the contrary, it takes some time for her to be able to connect emotionally and to trust someone else.

“Tough to love” can be used to describe some Aquarius women. Her partner must be mentally prepared to meet the challenges posed by this strong willed, independent woman. To her, communication is the key to a successful romance and she may rationalize every emotion. But, as friendly as she is, getting through to her heart takes some time.

Once the Aquarius woman is touched by what she feels is true love, however, she will give herself to her partner freely and completely. Original and unpredictable, this woman may provide sources of pleasure that her partner never knew existed.

Independence is something the Aquarius woman values. She seeks it from a partner and she gives it freely as well. There’s always a part of her that she keeps separate from others. This is an intellectual air sign even though it’s referred to as a water bearer. Her ideal match has a lot of brains and understands her diversity.

Aquarius and Relationships

Space and freedom are what an Aquarius woman needs most in a relationship. Give her room to breathe and blow away any expectation of a traditional house frau, content to leave your slippers out by the fireplace, put the children to bed, and cook your dinner. The Aquarius woman is more likely to have left the children out by the fireplace, put your meal to bed and cooked your slippers for dinner. She’s a little bit of a rebel, and her perfect relationship is with someone who is happy to overturn the status quo with her. Ideal partners are generally considered to be Libra, Gemini, Sagittarius, and Aries.

Aquarius and Friendships

Walk down the street with your water-bearing Aquarius friend and count how many people stop to say hello and a how-do-you-do to her. She’s friends with absolutely everyone, or that’s what it feels like. In truth, though, the Aquarius woman seldom allows people to get too close to her. She can be slightly reserved when it comes to her real feelings and you will find that her circle of friends is, in reality, a lot smaller than her casual hello-goodbye routine indicates. Generous, and always there when you need them, Aquarians flock with friends who share their love of independence and intellectual pursuits.

The Aquarius woman will surround herself with a wide range of friends and a broad spectrum of personalities. Some say she needs this variety because she can be a bit quirky herself.

Placing a high value on friendship, the Aquarius woman is extremely loyal and is known for having long-term friends and equally enduring relationships.

Aquarius and Sex

Sex is partly a cerebral affair for an Aquarius woman. What she seeks in the bedroom is an Einstein who can dazzle her with a brilliant mind, but also hopefully, an Einstein with a better haircut and possibly more of a tan. Aquarians tend to be envelope pushers, always experimenting, never inhibited. They are risk takers both in and out of bed, so don’t be overly surprised if an Aquarius woman suggests an al fresco rendezvous somewhere public – the frisson from breaking the rules is exactly what turns this sign on.

Aquarius and Career

The Aquarius woman is an ‘idea’ person. She questions everything and produces imaginative new ideas, but doesn’t always want to be the person who puts it all together and makes it happen. As long as the Aquarius woman controls her naturally assertive, inflexible ways with employees, she makes a good leader, an inspiring colleague, and an all-around likable and hard-working employee.

Occupations for this woman could include social work, photography, mechanics and engineering, psychology, architecture, or education. The arts, travel industry, scientist, athlete, politician, environmentalist, astrologer, marketing and public relations are all strong choices.

Lady Aquarius isn’t well-suited for a predictable 9-5 job stuffed away in a cubicle. She’s too independent for stagnant work. She’s creative and idealistic and wants to put her strong people-oriented skills to good use. Do not micro-manage an Aquarian! She works fine with no supervision.

Aquarius and Money

The Aquarius woman is independent and takes full responsibility for her own financial stability. This lady is progressive minded and not against taking some risk with her investments, but she will always be involved in determining what those are.

Unlike some sun signs that live for saving and/or spending money, many Aquarian women are not quite as attached. They often wonder if it can be given away to someone that needs it more. If such an Aquarian woman does come into a lot of money she should hire an accountant to manage it for her. Those who are more attached to their money can be very shrewd with it. Financial advisers beware – the detached, unemotional stature of the Aquarius woman makes her a tough negotiator.

Aquarius and Family

Aquarians make loving parents, though they can seem remote at times, and still like to have that little bit of independence, that me-time for themselves. Their kids can really benefit from this, as they too learn to be their own individuals. Aquarian mothers take the trouble to understand their offspring, treating them with care and respect. They never talk down to their children, but they’re also not too grown up to get down on their hands and knees to play bears under the table. Games with Aquarius Mom will be exciting and unusual, and she will get really involved.

With their own families, rather than hiding their family’s idiosyncrasies from others, the Aquarius woman is proudest of what makes their family unique and different.

Aquarius and Health

The area of the body ruled by Aquarius is the ankles, and it pays to take care of them. Aquarians are more likely to sprain or break their ankles, usually because they’re thinking about something else and not looking where they are going.

Generally in good health, the Aquarius woman doesn’t particularly care for exercise unless it’s attached to some form of social activity, so you will rarely find her doing aerobics by herself.

Aquarius and Fashion

No generic shopping malls for the Aquarius woman – not a chance! She will more likely be found buying vintage pieces in thrift stores, piecing together individual outfits and unique looks. Never a fashion follower, an Aquarius woman is often positively contrary, swishing around in maxi dresses when minis are “in” and inspiring trends of her own. Interestingly, she usually works whatever she chooses. She has a gloriously eclectic personal style, and is unafraid to shock and dazzle her admirers with a daring top or an outrageous color combination. Her favorite colors are bright and attention grabbing, like turquoise blue, hot pink, and emerald green.

The Aquarian woman can dress to shock. One day she’ll be sporting bright pink hair and facial jewelry, and the next she’ll be wearing a demure navy business suit and her hair will have returned to its normal color. Or she can combine things that don’t usually go well together like a dressy silk blouse and khaki pants. Her eclectic tastes allow her to shop at a vintage store or a designer boutique.

Always reaching for the sky, electric blue seems the natural color for this woman. Avant-garde wardrobe, chic hairstyles, and sometimes off-the-wall elegance in footwear and jewelry, an Aquarius woman will make her own statement.

The Aquarius Woman: Decanates

January 21 – 30 – Aquarius/Aquarius Decanate – those born in this decanate tend to be more persistent in attaining their goals. This Aquarius lady is also highly original.



January 31 – February 9 – Aquarius/Gemini Decanate – Aquarians with a Gemini influence are great communicators.



February 10 – 19 – Aquarius/Libra Decanate – those born in this decanate are likely to be quite personable and attractive.

The Aquarius Woman: Style

The Aquarian woman is not your average fashionista. In fact, she is not your average anything, and the only thing anyone can be sure of is that her style will be uniquely her own. It is also likely to be so out of step with everyone else that it is, in fact, visionary. Everyone will be wearing that next year.

The Aquarian woman can look amazing. There is always something striking about her, usually long shapely legs, but it could be her eyes, her hair or just the way she walks. She will stand out even in the plainest clothes at the dullest of occasions – not that you are likely to find her there. If she does turn up, chaos will inevitably follow and it sure won’t be dull anymore.

The Aquarian woman can be amazingly funny, describing how she ran up the outfit she is wearing at the last minute on her mother’s forty-year-old sewing machine. No one will know if she is joking or not, because although the outfit looks fine, it also doesn’t look like anything in the shops. It might be the color, or the style, or the fact that it appears to be worn back to front, but it will be unique in some way.

Fashion makes the Aquarian woman skittish – she loves it, but she has high standards, and impenetrable ethics. Anything made in a sweatshop will be on her blacklist. Anything that supports a community will have her blessing. So she may favor fair trade fashions over the department stores. No matter, it will still look great on her. She has an effortless approach to clothes.

Beauty without cruelty is another of her obsessions. She will only buy beauty brands that are guaranteed not to have involved animal testing. This narrows her choices, so she may even start making her own. She will have a deep interest in natural therapies anyway, and that goes along with the crystals, and the wind chimes, and the other signs that she is not quite of this world.

In fact, Aquarians are the aliens of the zodiac, and they are quite proud of it. They all seem to be looking at life on earth with the fascinated gaze of the anthropologist from another planet, and this includes our obsessions with celebrities and fashion. Some of it has the Aquarian woman scratching her head and looking for clues to the human psyche. If she finds any answers, no matter how way out, she will be happy to share them.

In spite of this sensation of being from some other place, the Aquarian woman is friendly and sociable, and not usually given to combat, unless it is a righteous cause. She will happily go shopping with her more grounded friends, although she enjoys it more as a social occasion than a bargain hunt. She will buy something that catches her eye, but never has a shopping list. She can’t be bothered to bargain, especially if it for a good cause, or even if it is not. She is thinking of the people whose lives depend on that sale.

The Aquarian woman likes spur of the moment jaunts, cultural events (although her idea of culture may be a head-banging concert), and long walks through the park or the countryside. She generally seems unconnected, but then she surprises everyone by falling in love, usually with someone right out of left field. Maybe they meet at a sci-fi convention, or a UFO spotting night. But once the Aquarian woman falls in love, there is no going back. She may go through several break ups, but she will always remain friends with her exes, and they will never quite get over her. When The One comes along, she will remain true no matter what happens. Her sexual nature is inclined to be out of left field too, which can be a delightful surprise for a more conservative lover.

Another air sign, Gemini or Libra, will be most able to communicate with this star child. But Gemini may prove too light for the Aquarian woman’s deep thought, and Libra will try to make her more respectable. It may be that Leo, her opposite sign, offers the best chance of happiness. Leo’s warmth and generosity will captivate the socially conscious Aquarius woman, while nurturing and honoring her ethical sense.

See Also:

Aquarius Horoscopes:

Aquarius Daily Horoscope

Aquarius Monthly Horoscope

Aquarius Yearly Horoscope

Aquarius Yearly Love Horoscope

Aquarius Ascendant Daily Horoscope

Aquarius Good Days Calendar

Future Forecast Report

2017 Aquarius Preview Horoscope

All About Aquarius

Aquarius Ascendant

Aquarius Compatibility:

Aquarius Sun Sign Compatibility

Aquarius Moon Sign Compatibility

Aquarius Venus Sign Compatibility

Get the full scoop with a Love Styles: About Her Report. The report averages 25 pages long, and it’s all about a woman’s styles in love, in relationship, and in bed.

Don’t know the positions of your planets? Be sure to find out your personal astrology data online, at no cost.

Explore your relationship dynamics with a lover, partner, or love interest with a COMPATIBILITY REPORT.

See our Synastry article for more advanced relationship analysis techniques.

Intermediate and advanced students of Astrology might enjoy our article, SoulMate Astrology.

Determine the positions of Venus and Mars by sign and learn the sexual secrets of your partner, and yourself!

If you don’t know the positions of Venus and Mars, refer to these tables:

Venus Sign Table

Mars Sign Table

OR click here to find the positions of all your planets.