In her book, Ms. Wapnick writes about a concept called multipotentiality, the ability to excel in multiple fields that are typically unrelated to each other. Multipotentiality has a handful of practical benefits. For example, learning skills in one area can translate to skills in another.

“In university, I took film classes, philosophy classes, geology classes, music classes,” Ms. Wapnick said. “I was exposed to so many new ideas, which was in and of itself great. But many of the skills I acquired in these classes also ended up being useful in real, albeit unexpected, ways. The improvisation skills I learned in a music class ended up being useful years later when giving presentations. And the legal classes I took made me a more persuasive writer.”

Psychologists refer to this learning style as broad learning. As children, and even in college, we’re encouraged to embrace many different subjects, immerse ourselves in them and explore. This is in contrast to specialized learning, which “refers to tailored learning for a specific purpose, such as for a particular job,” said Rachel Wu, a professor and researcher at the University of California, Riverside.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Smarter Living Newsletter A weekly roundup of the best advice from The Times on living a better, smarter, more fulfilling life. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Undergraduates often have to take general or breadth classes, which serve the purpose of allowing for broad learning,” Dr. Wu said. “Universities typically try to strike a balance between helping the student hone some skills in a particular area, while encouraging the student to take classes outside of their major.”

We gradually switch from broad learning to specialized learning in our 20s as we home in on a specialty, then pick a job and adopt a special set of skills, Dr. Wu said. But when students are forced to see college as a means to an end, they potentially switch from broad learning to a specialized learning mind-set even sooner.

In a paper recently published in Human Development, Dr. Wu theorizes that this switch from broad to specialized learning plays a role in cognitive function. In other words, specialized learning might lead to cognitive decline as we age — the feeling that you’re just “not as sharp” as you used to be.

“According to my new theory, specialized learning encourages efficiency in the short term,” Dr. Wu said. “To be efficient in the short term, we have to prioritize what we already know. When we prioritize what we already know for a long time, we may have more difficulty adapting to new unfamiliar situations. And this difficulty in adapting to new situations may lead to decline first in unfamiliar situations, and eventually in familiar situations.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Wu and her colleagues theorize that in both children and adults, broad learning increase abilities like working memory, inhibition and attention. When higher education becomes less about learning and more about specializing, finding a major and picking a job, we may miss out on the benefits of broad learning.

“We’re encouraged to deepen our existing knowledge rather than develop new skills or consider how disparate ideas relate to one another,” Ms. Wapnick said. “This can lead to a sense of boredom and dissatisfaction. It also stifles healthy interdisciplinary dialogue that fuels innovation.”

Despite the specialized focus in higher education, it’s possible to embrace broad learning at any age. This can be as simple as picking up a hobby or a personal project in your spare time. If you’re a student, it might be as simple as joining a campus group unrelated to your major.

“I think we sometimes forget that activities don’t have to be profitable to be valuable,” Ms. Wapnick said. “Learning enriches our lives and allows us to look at the world and our work from new angles. “If you’re someone who is yearning to broaden your focus, set some time aside to try a new activity, start a personal project or take a class.”

Broad learning focuses on new, unfamiliar subjects and the ability to develop new skills and abilities with effort. It also emphasizes learning these skills simultaneously and in a forgiving environment, meaning you’re encouraged to make mistakes, fail, then learn from those mistakes. In short, it’s learning for the sake of learning. So approaching new subjects with this mind-set will help.

“At the very least, keeping an open mind about learning new information probably will always be beneficial,” Dr. Wu said.