Ready to join forces? This Tuesday, September 5 go-getter Mars flows into Virgo and your seventh house of partnerships until October 22, buoying your confidence in the relationship department. Mars is a lusty one, and lukewarm connections could go full boil, bringing some fairy tale fantasy fulfillment to your days. Concentrating on work will not be easy—you'll rather be romping it up in the sheets. But do try, because business partnerships are also blessed by this Mars cycle. An exciting co-venture could be inked over the next seven weeks, bringing you both a new wave of prosperity. And let's be honest: There's no better mirror for yourself than a BFF, business soulmate or other constant companion. Want to know what's going on inside of you? We know it's sometimes confusing, especially for your dreamy, Neptune-ruled sign. But just look at the reactions and responses you're getting from others, and you'll get some strong hints. If you don't like what you see, you'll know what to tweak, from within, of course. Perhaps it's your tendency to sweep things under the rug instead of making clear and sultry requests. Surrounding yourself with people who reflect the best in you is important, too. Boot any constant critics, doubters and naysayers from your inner circle. Heads up: Mars can also be an impulsive and agitating force. Put deals in writing to avoid later misunderstandings, Pisces. On the flipside, Mars' restless influence can help you break out of raw deals. There are too many alluring fish in the sea to waste your time with the stingrays!

You'll get additional support in the deal-making department on Tuesday, as messenger Mercury ends a retrograde that began on August 12. For the past few weeks, even scheduling a conference call has been like herding cats. No more wringing your hands in exasperation. Mercury's positive pivot is well timed, since people will be in "back to work" mode after Labor Day. Give it another go, Pisces, and send out a calendar invitation and conference line number—or better yet, rally everyone for a team-building lunch before diving straight back into business. With Mercury launching forward through Leo and your sixth house of efficiency on Sunday, devote a good part of the week to organizing your calendar, cleaning out your inbox and (especially) doing outreach to the movers and shakers you want to work alongside this fall.

Wednesday's annual full moon in Pisces is cause for celebration and unbridled self-expression! Go ahead: Shout your message from the rooftops, Snapchat it to the world, shoot a video and post it on your newly minted YouTube channel. During this once-per-year lunation, you should feel even more like your authentic self. This is the one day when shameless self-promotion isn't merely encouraged—it's advised. This moon is the manifestation point of the February 26 Pisces solar eclipse—the final in a two-year series. A personal goal that you've been working toward since March 20, 2015 could manifest big time in the next two weeks. Better still? It could draw public attention and a new wave of fans, friends and followers. Or maybe you'll scrap it all and start fresh. La luna can serve up a huge epiphany about your next big move, so watch for the kind of signs that others miss. Stay open-minded. Even if a lifestyle change is involved, you're more than ready for it. And if there's one thing Pisces knows better than all the other signs, it's that, when big change is afoot, the LAST thing you should do is opinion poll your friends! This is a time to trust your higher wisdom and intuition. This may involve wriggling out of restrictive relationships (or contracts) that leave you feeling suffocated. You don't have to engage in an argument. Just hold your ground and remember that saying "no" is your birthright.



SEE ANOTHER SIGN’S WEEKLY HOROSCOPE