Racket strings can be another hidden cost. Each tournament provides a stringer, but stringing costs $20 per racket. Wozniak said she took six rackets and 30 reels of polyester string, also provided free by Yonex, to each tournament. Until this year with Yonex, she was spending $90 per package for gut strings and stringing three to six rackets per match.

Wozniak can detail every aspect of her routine and recall every expense.

She began playing tennis at 3 in Blainville, Quebec, outside Montreal, so none of this labor is new. In many ways, her current life mirrors her old one as a junior, except that now she is alone.

As a promising youngster, Wozniak was coached by her father, Antoni, a mechanic, who kept their Nissan Micra running years past its normal life expectancy. He drove it across North America and back, seemingly dozens of times, to ferry his daughter to junior amateur tournaments.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Wozniak nicknamed it Mr. Bean’s Car, from the British television show, and said it had 400,000 kilometers (about 249,000 miles) on it.

When her father could not travel, Wozniak’s mother took her on Greyhound buses, zigzagging across the southern United States.

“Some of those bus stops were in scary places,” she recalled. “My rackets would be in the bottom of the bus, and I would sit by the window so I could look outside in case anyone took them.”

Eventually, Wozniak made good money on the WTA Tour and in Grand Slam events, where even a first-round exit can be worth $30,000. With more than $2 million in career prize money, she built up some equity. But her current quest to return to the elite level of tennis is siphoning off her accounts in a steady drip.

“This is the third time in my career I’ve had to start from zero,” she said.

Injuries are a constant threat for athletes, and Wozniak has endured her share of physical ailments. But seven years ago, she also faced a serious emotional malady that cost her time and money.

“April 2010 was the toughest moment of my life,” Wozniak said. “I had been through burnout and depression. I have never talked about it. There was so much pressure that I had built up after reaching 21 in the world.”

Photo

Her parents and older sister helped her through that dark period of inactivity, but if tennis players don’t play because of illness or injury, they don’t get paid.

Wozniak’s ranking plummeted to No. 200, but she fought back and reached No. 41 in 2012. Then a complicated shoulder surgery at age 27 cost her an entire year. Her ranking ballooned to No. 946 in 2015, but by last year she had whittled it down to 287th by playing tiny tournaments in Stillwater, Okla.; Albuquerque; and Gatineau, Quebec.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Occasionally at those outposts, the daily routine can be demeaning for proud athletes. Most tournaments require a $40 entrance fee, which is deducted from the player’s earnings. But since there is no prize money for a loss in the first round of qualifying, some tournaments ask for the entrance fee upfront — in cash.

In Surprise, Ariz., last year, Wozniak said, she had only a $20 bill on her, so she borrowed the other $20 from the American player Ashley Weinhold. Wozniak did well in Surprise, winning five matches. But even that brought up the inherent financial paradox of the smaller tournaments: She had to stay longer in her hotel — 10 days for a total of $2,500 just for lodging — and she earned only $654 for reaching the quarterfinals.

At least she was able to pay back Weinhold.

Moving On

Stollar won her first-round match in Charlottesville against Carol Zhao in straight sets. She stayed at the club through the afternoon, mingling with the other players, most of whom she knew, and worked out again with Rodriguez. The next day was Rodriguez’s birthday, and Stollar, with the help of the hotel’s reception desk, ordered a special gluten-free cake for her coach.

Then she took an Uber car back to her room at the Homewood Suites, where she had a typical night on the road talking to her mother and friends on FaceTime. Rodriguez went out and brought back sushi, Stollar’s favorite, and had it sent to her room.

But the next day, Stollar lost to Claire Liu in straight sets. Her mother, ever intent on her daughter’s progress, watched nervously on a live-stream feed from their home outside Budapest, and then immediately called a travel agent to arrange Stollar’s next flight. Within an hour, Stollar and Rodriguez had received email confirmations from a Hungarian travel agent for their flights back to Boca Raton, Fla., where Stollar was training and staying with Rodriguez’s family.

Their flight left before Rodriguez’s birthday cake was ready.

“It’s too bad,” Stollar said. “But you know, we can’t change all our plans for a cake.”

By then, Wozniak was already on her way back to Montreal. She lost in the first round at Charlottesville — also to Liu — with a half-dozen people watching, including her host, Stephanie Scheel. For Wozniak, staying in the free housing was the only sensible choice.

“She was such a nice guest,” Scheel said. “She even did her own dishes.”