Don’t Miss Top Attractions, places to go and things to do

You’ve got a long weekend or a few days in Prague and you’ve not had a great deal of time to go through the recommended guide books. Prague has hundreds of tourist attractions catering to a wide range of tastes and interests. This page gives you a “Don’t Miss” list of the top ten Prague tourist attractions and other things to do to make sure you have a memorable time. If you’ve got longer here then it’s the same list but, take your time.

Prague by Month

This page covers most of the permanent attractions. Also check my tips on what to pack, eating, drinking, festivals and one-off events all specific to that month.

Prague in January

Prague in February

Prague in March

Prague in April

Prague in May

Prague in June

Prague in July

Prague in August

Prague in September

Prague in October

Prague in November

Prague in December

Old Town Square – The Old Town Hall

The town got royal permission to build its own town hall and this was completed in 1338. Most people will not go inside and much of the internal areas have no public access anyway so people confine themselves to the view from outside. Of course the most striking attraction is the tower which you can get to either by walking up the ramps or by lift. The most popular aspect is the Astronomical Clock and Calendarium which on the hour during the day causes the windows to open so you can see the procession of the apostles. Both the clock and calendarium have had damage and maintenance issues over the years an at one point after restoration it was the first time in more than 400 years that both had been working at the same time.

read more …

Charles Bridge

Originally a wooden structure it got washed away during a bad flood and was replaced by a stronger stone structure which became known as the Judith Bridge. After more flood damage it was basically this structure that was strengthened, repaired and formed into what you see today. It was decorated and renamed in the honour of King Charles IV. It has 30 statues of saints (15 on each side) each with it’s own history and unbelievably it still had a tram line running across it up until 1976.

read more …

Mala Strana – Church of St Nicholas

The Church of St Nicholas is the most famous Baroque church in Prague. Twelve houses, including the important Rotunda of St Wenceslas, an old school and two adjacent cemeteries were closed and demolished to make space for the building. Construction began when the Jesuits chose the initial plans by Giovanni Domenico Orsi in 1673 and lasted approximately one hundred years. There are different elements to the church including it’s art, architecture, musical venue and site of a Czech security observation point.

read more …

Church of Our Lady Victorious

Who made the little 19 inch wooden wax covered doll is not known but we do know that The Infant Jesus of Prague originally came from Spain and was given as a wedding present to Duchess Maria Manrique de Lara in 1556 on her marriage in Bohemia. On her death the statuette passed to her daughter Polyxena. After her first husbands death she married into the powerful Lobkowicz family and in 1628 she decided to give the precious statue to the monastery of the Discalced Carmelites attached to the church of Our Lady of Victory.

read more …

Prague Castle – Old Royal Palace

The Royal Palace was one of the original buildings in the castle complex and adjoined to the All Saints Chapel (now the All Saints Church). The Vladislav Hall was added later. If you here talk of “defenstration” it was from windows in this hall that the two governors were thrown. The wide staircase is named the “riders staircase” as knights would arrive in the hall on horseback. The view from the hall overlooks the adjacent gardens.

read more …

Prague Castle – Golden Lane

Home to the “little people” i.e. servants, smiths and soldiers and one Franz Kafka once in a while. You’ll have to be little to get under the doors without banging your head as well. Its a neat little cobble stoned street with houses on one side mostly built into the wall. Quaint windows, antique furnishings and earth colours make it an interesting place to visit.

read more …

Prague Picture Gallery

This is a permanent exhibition showing more than 100 paintings from the collection of Rudolph II and new collections from the 17th Century to the present. The exhibition is located in the former stables of the second courtyard adjacent to the Pacassi Gate.

read more …

The Petrin Watchtower

The Petrin Lookout Tower (rozhledna) is a 63.5 metre high steel framework tower in Prague. It’s often referred to as the “little Eiffel Tower” even though the design and size is completely different (it looks similar). Set in the grounds of the Petrin Park it looks great all year round but best in the spring and summer.

read more …

Municipal House (Obecni Dum)

The Municipal House was originally built to be an administrative and cultural centre. Located just inside the Old Town it was built on the area once occupied by the former Royal Court before it moved to Prague Castle. Formerly an army barracks it was demolished as part of the Czech National Revival celebrations at the turn of the 20th Century. Commissioned by the city, building began in 1906 and the Municipal House opened in 1912 and for many years stood as both a functioning building and national landmark.

read more …

Other Prague things to do and see