The seatbelt was not tight enough, the institute found, allowing the crash test dummy’s torso to be thrown so far forward that its head hit the steering wheel through the airbag. The impact was hard enough that it could cause a concussion or facial fractures in a real crash, said David Zuby, the organization’s executive vice president and chief research officer. But there was not a “high risk” of serious injury.

“The seatbelt force limiter and airbag did not work together quite the way we think is good for this type of crash,” he said.

The car’s headlights were rated “poor.”

The insurance institute did not test the Model S’s forward collision prevention and automatic braking system because it bought the car before Tesla added new hardware and software in October.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Tesla made those changes after a man died in a crash in Florida in May when the Model S was using Autopilot, its driver-assistance system. This month, federal regulators said they found no defects in the system that caused the crash and that the vehicle did not need to be recalled.

On Jan. 23, Tesla made a change to address the head contact issue, Mr. Zuby said. The insurance institute will conduct a new small overlap test and will test the forward collision avoidance system when it receives a new vehicle with the changes.

Tesla says its Model S still has the lowest probability of injury of any car ever tested by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration. And when the insurance institute gets its new Model S with modifications, Tesla says it expects “to receive the highest possible rating in every category, making Model S eligible for the I.I.H.S. Top Safety Pick award.”

The 2017 Model S was one of two all-electric vehicles the institute tested. The other, the BMW i3, narrowly missed one of the safety awards because its head restraints were rated “acceptable,” not “good.”

Instead of the Top Safety Pick+ designation going to these two luxury cars, it went to two less-expensive plug-in hybrids, the 2017 Chevrolet Volt and Toyota Prius Prime.

“Consumers might expect that luxury brand vehicles are safer, and in many cases they’d be right,” Mr. Zuby said. “But that’s not a hard and fast rule.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The insurance institute recommended that people choose any of the seven other 2017 large luxury models that have fared better than the Model S. The Top Safety Pick+ rating went to the Genesis G90 and G80 models, made by Hyundai, and the Lexus RC. Four rated “Top Safety Pick” are the Acura RLX, Audi A6, Infiniti Q70 and Volvo S90.