Movement is critical in our lives. Often, in order to grow or to overcome strife we need a sense of undergoing a passage or transition. Movement shifts perspective and, in so doing, provides clarity, firing up hope, drive and possibility.

Anyone who has found themselves opening up to a friend on a long walk or road trip will be familiar with the sense of ease that comes from talking and moving at the same time. The words seem to flow, tumbling from story to story. Secrets, seldom shared before, can fall into the conversation with surprising ease. When silence comes it seems to be a natural part of the experience, too.

Sometimes we refer to this as “emotion in motion”, the sensation of feeling full of and connected to our feelings as we move. We may begin to connect with feelings that are hidden deep down. As we start to move our emotions rise up, enlivened by the energy we exert and the story we are telling ourselves. It is as though the movement somehow becomes an enactment or performance of our inner emotions.

This powerful process of walking or running with, into or through our feelings can be insightful and liberating, and is the bedrock of mindful running – or Dynamic Running Therapy (DRT).

Part of mindful running is learning what the way you run says about you

Mindful running uses the movement of your body to get you closer to what is going on inside you emotionally, helping you to both understand and process it better. It can also be adapted to whatever level of fitness you have as long as you are challenging yourself physically some degree some of the time. This means that if a walk is a struggle for you, that counts as DRT. Likewise, if sprinting is your thing then you can set that as your DRT pace. The goal is to find a level of challenge where the blood starts to flow a little faster. There is no need to push yourself too hard or to maintain the same pace throughout the session.

Mindful running isn’t complicated or particularly challenging. You are not actively changing anything – merely noticing the tone of your inner dialogue and meeting whatever you find there with acceptance and patience, letting it pass on by naturally. It is an open-ended practice, continuing until you decide to stop.

Movement is instinctive and written deep into our DNA. So, why learn from only the spoken word, or thoughts, when the moving body is so informative? The body screams out in communication and can tell you everything, from what makes you happy and sad to what you do with stress and anger. Your slumped posture reflects how heavily the world weighs down on you. The spring in your step today could be a consequence of your promotion yesterday.

How you run may indicate how you move in the wider world, such as in your relationships or work life. Are you quick to start but tire rapidly? Are you consistently paced but just can’t let go? Or perhaps you’re all about the sprint finish, forgetting that the detail of how you start the run is important too? Part of mindful running is understanding and learning what your running style says about you.

Unlike conventional running, it’s crucial to avoid “striving”. Striving is the bedfellow of anxiety and a modern curse of the first order. There is no use in trying to run as far as possible as fast as possible while understanding as much as possible. As you progress you will find your pace and your footing – don’t try to rush to the end.

Run for Your Life by William Pullen is published by Penguin Life (£12.99). Order a copy for £11.04, at bookshop.theguardian.com