Hallways don't tend to get much design love when it comes to our homes, with us usually giving a lot more attention, money and energy to the other rooms in our homes. But they can be places greatly improved by a little design attention, and make your whole home feel full and finished!

1. Bookshelves

Make or buy narrow bookshelves to line the walls of your hallway, like seen in this hallway on Homebunch. You'll want to make sure you've got a hallway wide enough accommodate bookshelves and travel, but they can be a great storage solution for book lovers who often feel their bookshelves make their other rooms feel cluttered.

2. Narrow and stylish storage

Super narrow consoles, credenzas or wall mounted storage solutions can be both a way to add extra storage to a small home when placed in the hallway, but can also be areas to add art and vignettes to. This idea spotted on Happy Interior Blog.

3. Added architectural detail

If your home didn't come with a lot of architectural detail to begin with (and you're able to make small changes that involve holes in the wall), you might consider focusing your creative energy on adding architectural detail to your hallway, like with wainscoting. Putting it in the hallway will be a potent display of style and save you from having to put it in all of your rooms (unless you want to). This inspiration seen on House185.

4. Lots of art

It's a design element that anyone can add to their home's hallways: Lots and lots of art. Fill the hallway walls from ceiling to floor, or make a big visual impact by doing something bold with your art collage, like a formal and strict straight line or other pattern of hanging. This look (combined with small storage and display) seen on The Everyday Girl.

5. Seating

Okay the photo above isn't technically a hallway we suppose, and most people won't have windows in their hall, but if you do, consider building out a simple window seat and adding lovely textiles to make it welcoming and like a place you want to stop and look at the view for awhile. Or, like the storage console idea, consider a narrow and unimposing bench to place in your hallway (if there's room) to add design interest. This room spotted on House of Turquoise.

6. Pattern

As spotted in this post: Before & After: Newly Painted Hallway is a Stroke of Genius, you don't have to add a ton of new furniture or art to a hallway to make it more interesting — some bold pattern will do the trick just fine.

7. Something for the kids

(Or fun-loving adults!) We love this low chalkboard idea that stretches the length of the hallway, perfect for kids who love to doodle on walls. But you could also paint a strip of chalkboard paint at grown-up height for creating a hallway that encourages interaction from your guests! This idea seen on Capturing Joy Kristen Duke.