The topic of porn is not one that you hear many movie stars, athletes, or other celebs speaking up about. These high-profile celebs are usually pretty careful with what they say to the media, especially when talking about subjects that a lot of people consider taboo. However, due to the science and research that is coming out daily on the harmful effects of porn, more and more celebrities are starting to take a stand and voice their opinions about the prevalence of porn in our society and how it has affected them personally.

The following is a list of the five most popular notable figures who have publicly addressed the issue of pornography and why they’re against it.



Terry Crews

In his book Manhood, Terry Crews talked openly about how he was addicted to pornography since the age of 12 years old and how it deeply affected his marriage. In an excerpt from an interview with the Tom Joyner Morning Show, Crews and his wife of 25 years, Rebecca, opened up about the effects it had on their life together:

Terry, did you have a collection or was it just online?

Online. It wasn’t a collection, I was smart enough not to keep anything in the house… I (was) suffering from something. I was a loving father, husband, the whole thing, but in the back of my mind I needed something like pornography just to chill. It’s almost like not admitting you’re an alcoholic or something like that. But the thing is you can’t live in two worlds and I was getting farther and farther away from Rebecca. Pornography is an intimacy killer. It just started building up a wall. A lot of people get divorced and they don’t even understand how the separation began. It wasn’t that she caught me. She was like, ‘Something is wrong with you,’ and I finally had to admit it was a problem… I realized I couldn’t stop.

Then, earlier this summer, Terry officially joined the #PornKillsLove movement by repping one of our popular Porn Kills Love tees and giving Fight the New Drug a shout out to his millions of followers.

Support for my people over at @FightTheNewDrug! #PornKillsLove A photo posted by Terry Crews (@terrycrews) on May 7, 2015 at 9:28am PDT



Side note: Both Terry and Rebecca Crews follow Fight the New Drug on Instagram and Twitter. They’re pretty awesome.





Joseph Gordon Levitt

Everybody loves some JGL right? Well here is a reason to love him even more. In late 2013, Joseph Gordon-Levitt’s directorial debut hit theaters. The widely released Don Jon, was the topic of much discussion in the media because of the movie’s subject matter—porn.

The media described it as a movie simply about porn and a lot of people probably went and saw it because of that. However, after seeing the movie, many realized what it was actually about: love, relationships, and false depictions of both in pornography/media.

The movie, which was written, directed, and starred in by Gordon-Levitt, features Jon, a good looking, macho man who has no trouble with the ladies. However, he finds that regardless of all the beautiful women that he meets, and then after getting into a relationship with his dream girl, played by Scarlet Johannson, he realizes he is severely addicted to internet porn and openly admits that real women/real sex can never compare to porn.

In an interview talking about his character in the movie and the message of the film, Gordon-Levitt said:

“Everything in Jon’s life is sort of a one-way street. He is not connecting or engaging with anyone. That goes for the women in his life… It’s an item on a checklist. He doesn’t listen; he just takes. At the beginning of the movie, he is finding that dissatisfying because there’s the sequence where he brings a young lady home from the bar and he is comparing her to this checklist that he has gotten off of what he likes to see in a pornography video. Obviously, a real human being is not going to map onto that because there is a fundamental difference between a human being and an image on a screen.”

Since the movie, Gordon-Levitt has been open about his feelings about how the media and pornography negatively depict people and relationships. What a boss.



Rashida Jones

Rashida Jones has been all over the news lately for speaking out at the porn industry for damaging young women. The actress produced the popular documentary Hot Girls Wanted , which premiered at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival and then made a big splash when it was released exclusively on Netflix. The doc gives a raw, in-depth look at the exploitation of young women joining the porn industry in the internet age. Since its release, Jones has also been vocal about porn failing to properly represent equal female sexuality.

In the interview above, Jones speaks out about “the difference between sexuality and sexualization.” She says: “Women should feel pleasure and have sex and feel good about it – and there’s a lot of shame involved with porn.” Jones continued to say, “It’s performative, it’s fulfilling a male fantasy. It’s not about how you feel about it, it’s like going with it because you’re making money from it.” “The ‘female empowerment’ thing makes it tricky to have that conversation, because you’re making money and therefore you’re ’empowered’, but what is the real cost to your soul, to your psyche?” “They’re not connecting with or considering the real cost, the psychological cost, the emotional cost, the physical cost to your body – the trauma it does to your body to have sex for a living is a real thing,” Jones said of the teenage girls that the film follows. “And I think by the time they realize it, it’s not too late because they can go back to their lives, but they’ve lost their childhoods.” Jones also took a stand against today’s over-sexualized pop culture, describing it as “objectified, sexualized, performative”. Go Rashida.

Russell Brand You probably already knew this one but just in case you’ve been living under a rock, Russell Brand’s recent rant about the harmful effects of porn has gone viral on Fight the New Drug’s YouTube channel. With over 2.2 million views on our post of Russell’s video, people all over the world are talking about the comedian/activist who cites the science and research behind the harms of porn and then shares his personal experiences with it. The video gained so much attention that Brand even posted another video the next week, answering people’s comments from the previous video and further shedding light on the subject using his impressive vocabulary and knowledge. When it comes to porn, Russell Brand knows his stuff.

Hugh Grant When actor Hugh Grant appeared on U.S. chat show Watch What Happens Live, he spoke about having three children, his preconceptions about fatherhood, and how his new role as a parent has changed him for the better. At one point in the interview, Grant was asked when the last time he watched porn was.

(Click here to watch the exact part in the interview) Grant answered quickly, “Ah, I’m rather proud of this! About three years ago. Yes, I went cold turkey.” The interviewer then asked if quitting porn had changed his life for the better. Grant’s response? “I now have three children. I think there is a correlation.” We think so too, Hugh. Rock on.

This just goes to show that it doesn’t matter who you are, the facts remain the same: porn is harmful.

What YOU Can Do

Join with us (and these awesome celebs) and SHARE this article to spread awareness on the harmful effects of pornography. Get the word out and take a stand that porn is not cool.