Around 47% of the AI companies acquired since 2012 have had VC backing.

Where is this data coming from? Start your free trial today Email Where is this data coming from? Start your free trial today Email

Corporate giants like Google, IBM, Yahoo, Intel, Apple, and Salesforce are competing in the race to acquire private AI companies, with Ford, Samsung, GE, and Uber emerging as new entrants. Over 250 private companies using AI algorithms across different verticals have been acquired since 2012, with 37 acquisitions taking place in Q1’17 alone. That quarter also saw one of the largest M&A deals: Ford’s acquisition of Argo AI for $1B. Baidu has been particularly aggressive in its AI acquisitions in 2017, with 3 M&A deals so far this year, including its acquisition of Amazon Alexa Fund-backed Kitt.ai this quarter.

The State of Artificial Intelligence Download our research briefing to dive into private market trends, startups working on ‘general AI’ or human-like intelligence, and the most prominent industries using AI algorithms. Email

Google is the most active acquirer of AI startups, with 12 acquisitions under its belt since 2012. In 2013, Google picked up deep learning and neural network startup DNNresearch from the computer science department at the University of Toronto. This acquisition reportedly helped Google make major upgrades to its image search feature. In 2014 Google acquired British company DeepMind Technologies for some $600M (Google’s DeepMind program recently beat a human world champion in the board game “Go”). Last year, it acquired visual search startup Moodstock, and bot platform Api.ai. More recently, in Q3’17, Google acquired India-based Halli Labs.



Apple has been ramping up its M&A activity, and ranked second with a total of 8 acquisitions. It recently acquired California-based Lattice Data for $200M and Tel Aviv-based RealFace, valued at $2M. (The table below excludes computer vision-based AR/VR startups like SensoMotoric Instruments, which Apple acquired in Q2’17.)

Intel, Microsoft, and Facebook are tied for third place. Intel acquired 3 startups in 2016 alone: Itseez, Nervana Systems, and Movidius, while Facebook acquired Belarus-based Masquerade Technologies and Switzerland-based Zurich Eye recently. Microsoft recently acquired Genee and conversational AI startup Maluuba.

Salesforce and Twitter have acquired 4 AI startups each. Twitter’s most recent M&A deal was image-processing startup Magic Pony. Salesforce, which joined the race in 2015 with the acquisition of Tempo AI, made two major acquisitions last year: Khosla Ventures-backed MetaMind and open-source machine-learning server PredictionIO. GE made 2 acquisitions in November 2016: AI-IoT startup Bit Stew Systems, and CRM-focused Wise.io.

The timeline below shows the M&A activity of corporations that have made 2 or more acquisitions since 2012. (Note: The exact dates for Apple’s Novauris and Amazon’s Orbeus acquisitions are not known. They are marked with a star to indicate approximate date of acquisition.)

Track all the AI startups in this brief and many more on our platform From auto tech to healthcare, startups are transforming industries with artificial intelligence. Look for Artificial Intelligence in the Collections tab. Track AI Startups AI Startups 2050+ items items

We updated this timeline on 7/21/17 to include newer exits and updated information. An older version of this timeline that appeared in this article (as of Oct’16) is included below.