If you have embarrassing jiggly arms and you don’t feel comfortable to wear sleeveless shirts, then you are not alone. These jiggly parts of your arms are called triceps. Your triceps are the large muscles at the back of your upper limb and are primarily responsible for straightening the arms.

There are 2 main causes of flabby arms, the first one is age and the second is body fat. As we become older, our skin becomes saggier as it loses its elasticity. This is mainly noticeable in the upper parts of our hands. The problem is that there is not much we can do about it. As for the second cause – body fat – we can lose weight to reduce body fat including arm fat. If you are interested to lose weight and body fat then you should read my other posts: Amazing 9 Secrets of Losing Weight Without Diet and 12 Simple Tweaks for Weight Loss and Great Health. In addition to appropriate nutrition, you also need to tone your muscles by doing resistance exercises.

These exercises can be done at home, and some of them require 1-2 kg hand weights (dumbbells) or heavier if you want.

1. Triceps Dips

You will need a stable chair to perform this exercise. Place your hands shoulder-width apart on the chair, while your bum is in front of the chair. Your legs should be bent on the floor about hip-width and your back close to the chair. Now straighten out your arms but always keep the elbows slightly bent. Then slowly bend your elbows and lower your body towards the floor until your arms are at about 90 degree angle (you will feel tension in the triceps) then press with your arms and push yourself back up to the starting position. Repeat 10-15 times.

2. Push-Ups

Get on the floor with your hands under your shoulders. Keep your elbows close to your side and then lower your body. Then return to starting position. If you find it too hard, change your starting position so that your knees are bent and touch the floor. Repeat 10-15 times.

3. Tricep Kickbacks

For this exercise you will need 1-2 kg weights. Hold your weights and get on the floor while your knees and toes touch the floor. Bend your upper body forward from the hips up and bend your elbows at 90 degree angle. Now extend both your arms backwards while your palms facing each other. Feel the tension in the triceps and return to the starting position. Do 3 sets of 8-10 repeats.

4. Tricep Extensions

You can do this exercise by standing or lying on the floor. You will also need 1-2 kg weights.

If you lie on the floor:

Lye on your back and raise your arms above your chest. Keep your elbows slightly bent and not locked. Now bend your elbows at 90 degree so the weights reach the floor. Your elbows should be on either side of your head. Lift back to starting position. Repeat 15 times.

If you stand on the floor

Stand with knees soft and not locked. Straighten your arms while your elbows are next to your ears. Now bend your elbows at 90 degrees. Then squeeze your triceps to straighten your arms. Repeat 15 times.

5. Bent-Over Row

Place your feet shoulder-width apart. Bend your knees and bend your upper body forward from the hips up. Keep your spine neutral and don’t bend your lower back. Your hands should be straight under your shoulders. Now bend the elbows back while lifting your arms towards the sides of your chest (your shoulder blades should be pulled towards each other). Slowly lower the weights in a controlled movement and feel the tension at your triceps. Repeat 15 times.

6. One arm Pushup

Lie on your left side while your knees are slightly bent. Put your left arm on your right shoulder. Then press your right palm into the floor until it’s straight and lift your upper body. Repeat 10 times, and switch sides.

If you want to get rid of double chin as well see my other post about double chin exercises: