When I first set out to make this DIY Blanket Ladder I knew I was going to mimic the one I had seen before in the Pottery Barn catalog and knew I could make it for much less, but it wasn’t until just (literally) a second ago that I looked it up online to find out the price so that I could knock your socks off with how much money you could save by doing this yourself. But what ended up happening is that I knocked my own socks off because they charge $179 for their blanket ladder and I made mine for under $5! I’ll pause while you rub your eyes and reread…one. hundred. and. seventy. nine. dollars. For some wood that leans against the wall! Whaaaat? Ludicrous!

This project took less than 30 minutes plus some drying time. So simple. Look at the result!

Here is what you will need to make a 5ft. tall and 18 inch wide blanket ladder.

This post contains affiliate links for your convenience. Click here to read my full disclosure.

Supplies:

16 feet of wood. I used (1 3/8 x 1 3/8) 8 foot furring strips that were $2.07 each.

Eight 2 inch wood screws.

Stain (I used Minwax in Dark Walnut)

(Optional) Felt pads to put at the top of the ladder where it leans against the wall so it doesn’t mark up your wall.

How to Make a Blanket Ladder

Ready for the simplest tutorial to ever appear on this blog?





Step 1: Cut one 5 foot piece of wood from each of your 8 foot pieces, so that you have two five foot pieces.

Step 2: Cut four 18 inch pieces of wood from the remaining wood. (These need to be pretty exact.)

Step 3: Lay them out on the ground to make a ladder. I put mine 12 inches apart, but started 18 inches from the ground and left just 6 inches at the top so that I could actually hang a blanket on the bottom bar.

Step 4: Attach each bar with a screw.

Step 5: Stain it the color of your choice and let it dry and air out completely (so it doesn’t stink up your house or your blankets.)

Doesn’t it look pretty?

The difference in price is just completely insane I tell ya!





What do you think? This is going over to my cousin’s house. It has been on her list for awhile, and is the perfect gift!

RELATED: KNOCK OFF DECOR