Zodiac Signs and Magic: Astrology is the art of predicting the Future (Present & Past too) based on where are the planets in the Zodiac Circle. The Sun, the most powerful “planet” (it’s actually a Star but in astrology the Sun and Moon are called Planets) predicts our personality and our vital power.

Zodiac Signs and Magic

On the other hand, the place of the Moon reveals our talents and our charms. Read the powers of your Sun & Moon sign and see with what gifts and magical powers you were born with!

Aries

Aries the Ram is ruled by courageous and mighty Mars. Aries is the passionate breakthrough of Spring and the colour associated with this Zodiac sign is red (the Red of Fire, the Red of Poppies which spring from the dead land of Winter).

Those born under the influence of Aries have a natural ability to activate and recharge powerful amulets, talismans etc as the are “possessed” with the Strength of Spring. The key to tap into their Magic is Enthusiasm. They got natural healing abilities and the power to transfer vital energy.

They can do miracles with sex magic and they are great at banishing and exorcism where their determined nature to remove what is unwanted comes into play. So Zodiac Signs and Magic? Learning astrology can help us achieve greater results in Witchcraft.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Taurus

Taurus the Bull is ruled by the charming and enchanting Venus. Taurus is the time of the year when Spring has established her dominion over the land and everything is new again. The colour of Taurus is Green (the Green of leaves and pants – the radiating Green of Earth).

Those born under the influence of Taurus have a natural talent to perform and succeed in spells for wealth and good fortune (for many, Green is the colour of Good luck) and all Earthly delights. The key to activate their powers is their Sexuality & Satisfaction.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Gemini

Gemini the Twins are ruled by the bright and ever-moving Mercury. The colour associated with them is yellow of the small wild flowers and the Sun.

Gemini is associated with the Element of Air, the element which connects us all. This is why Gemini perform miracles when they cast spells to affect intellectual matters and communication. The can easily influence movements and travels. Gemini can possess great telepathic abilities and they are more adept in Astral Projection.

The key to activate their magical powers is interest. They have to be really interested somehow on what they are doing as they easily tend to lose focus.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Cancer

Cancer the Crab is ruled by the Great Lady of the Night sky, the Moon. The Colour associated with Cancer is silver, the colour of the Pale Moon.

Cancer is associated with Water. The Element of Water reigns over Emotions & Love and this is why spells for love and friendship are perfect when done by Cancers. Cancers are also excellent using all forms of divination and make good oracles if only they leave doubt behind.

The key to activate their powers is security. Cancers need to feel safe to release their magical powers. When performing a spell make sure that no one will intrude.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Leo

Leo the Lion is ruled by the glorious and ever-shining Sun. The colour which Leo is associated is the Golden – orange one, the one of the radiating rising Sun.

Leo is associated with the Element of Fire and the spells in which they are really talented is for Fame (expand fame and popularity) and all kind of pleasures (including sexual ones).

The key to activate their powers is to realize their Divine origin. Leo needs to feels like a king and there is no better way to do that but to realize that the bear the Divine seed in them.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Virgo

Virgo the Maiden is ruled by the wise and practical Mercury. The colour with which Virgo is associated with is the blue and the pale blue (the Blue of the skies) as Virgo, although an Earth sign, they are – almost always – lost in responsibilities trying to figure out how to serve and fulfil mostly the needs of others. This is why the Blue of the skies uplifts them and helps to remind them their Divine origin, their true Nature free of obligations.

Virgo is miraculous when dealing with spells for healing and any kind of evolution (material or spiritual). Because of their natural ability to deal with many issues & people at the same time, they can do miracles in telepathy & peace spells.

The key for Virgo to activate their Magical powers is to remember that they come from a Divine source and they are not just flesh and bones. In addition, they need always to focus on the bright side of Life and leave their fears and doubts behind.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Libra

Libra the Scales is ruled by the peaceful and beautiful Venus. Libra is associated with the Element of Air and the colour is the brilliant light violet and pink!

Libra has a natural talent for Beauty and Glamour spells. They are great to create illusions. They are also miraculous when dealing with Peace spells and spells to achieve Balance (whether in a Relationship, in our body … etc)!

The key for Libras to activate their powers is to feel as an Enchanter/Enchantress. Even though this is sometimes not the case, this is what you have to focus on. Search for that feeling, you know you have it!

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Scorpio

Scorpio the Scorpion is both ruled by Pluto and Mars. The colour with which Scorpio is associated with is red (the one of Blood and Cherries).

Scorpio is associated with the Element of Water. Scorpios are great when manipulating energy and this is why they can create powerful magic charms and sigils. They got very powerful intuition and they are really great when they want to find out the truth. Their instincts are almost always unmistakable and they are linked to their excellent survival skills. They cast powerful spells for sexual pleasure and they are good at defensive magic, banishing spells and removing obstacles. Due to their nature to adapt easily to every new environment, they are also good when it comes to all spells that have to do with change.

The key to activate their Magical Powers is to tap into their instincts, the more primitive, the better and to ensure that they remain focused on the matter at hand.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Sagittarius

Sagittarius the Centaur archer is ruled by the Wise and Auspicious planet Jupiter. The colour associated with Sagittarius is purple (the Royal Purple, as Jupiter – Zeus is the king of the Gods).

Sagittarius is associated with the Element of Fire. Sagittarius are great when cast spells which affect travel and/or travelling to other Realms. Jupiter bless them with the ability to be a source of happiness and optimism so they are great to heal negativity. Sagittarius can tap into Spiritual Wisdom – almost any time they want! – and access information which is prohibited.

The key for Sagittarius to activate their powers is optimism. They need to feel the flame of happiness burning in their hearts. The feeling that “every little thing is gonna be alright” is the key to their success.

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Capricorn

Capricorn the Goat is ruled by the Wise and Strong Saturn. The colour with which Capricorns are associated with is black (the black of the Night and of Lead).

Capricorns can perform miracles when dealing with Wealth and Career spells. Capricorns have a natural ability to find ways to fulfil their goals and satisfy their ambition. They are also great when tapping into the Wisdom of their ancestors (click here to read more about ancestral magic)

Capricorns can succeed in most spells as the key to their magical powers is Determination. When they make up their mind for something they tend to achieve it!

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Aquarius

Aquarius the Water Bearer, ruled by both Uranus and Saturn. The colour associated with Aquarius is Blue-Grey- the one of smoke! Aquarius is associated with the Element of Air.

Aquarius is great when performing spells to liberate and break any kinds of bonds and attachments. Their thirst for freedom will empower them to break negative spells, curses and addictions. Aquarius has also great natural abilities for astral projection and remote viewing.

The key for Aquarius to activate their Magical Powers is to breathe the air of Freedom and uniqueness. They need to adapt the spells to feel unique and one of a kind – ALWAYS!

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Pisces

Pisces the two Fishes, are ruled by both Neptune & Jupiter. The colour associated with Pisces is pure White and dark Blue (the one of the deep oceans).

The Element associated with Pisces is Water. Pisces can perform miracles when dealing with spells of the OtherWorld. They can successfully meddle with the Dream World and manipulate Dreams to promote intuition and/or divination. Illusion is their power and they can create strong illusions for healing and empowerment. They are also great to contact Spirits and Magical Entities such as Fairies.

The key to activate their Magical powers is fantasy. What we think of is real (or at least can become real!).

More Zodiac Signs and Magic: See here what type of Witch / Mage you are according to your Zodiac Sign.

Join our Magical Community in Facebook and Connect with us! https://www.facebook.com/MagicalRecipesOnline/