I’ve gotten several requests for my natural lip balm, lipstick, and Chapstick recipes, and while I’ve been making these for years, I finally got around to actually measuring the ingredients so I could tell you the recipe (I usually just made it by eyeballing the amounts).

Surprisingly, conventional lipstick can be a source of harmful chemicals and since it is used on the skin (lips) and near the mouth, these chemicals can be easily absorbed. These homemade lipstick variations let you create a personalized lipstick color that is chemical free and inexpensive to make.

If you aren’t a fan of colored lip sticks, you can make this recipe without any added color options to achieve a basic natural lip chap.

The Base Recipe

This base recipe will create a smooth, clear lipstick that is very moisturizing and protective. It is made from completely natural ingredients and is safe for us on the lips or skin. If you want, you can add color with the following add-ins to create a color of your choice.

Optional Color Add-Ins

For Red Hues: 1/8 teaspoon of beet root powder or 1 drop of natural red food coloring with no chemical additives. NOTE: Add these very slowly as a little goes a long way!

For Brown/Tan Hues: 1/4 teaspoon (or more for color) of organic cocoa powder, a tiny pinch of cinnamon or turmeric to get the shade you want

For a more Matte texture: 1/4 teaspoon bentonite clay– I use this with a color so it doesn’t leave a white tint on the lips.

For Scent: A drop of essential oil of choice (optional)

Other notes: I got all of my supplies from Mountain Rose Herbs, including the plastic container, which was $0.30.

What to do

Melt the beeswax, shea butter/cocoa butter and coconut oil in a glass jar without a lid in a small pot of simmering (not boiling) water. It should melt quickly because so little of each ingredient is used.

When melted, remove from heat and add any optional ingredients like color or scent. To get the hue in the picture above, I used a tiny pinch of beet root powder (1/8 tsp or less), 1/4 tsp cocoa powder, 1/8 tsp bentonite clay, 1/8 tsp cinnamon and a drop of peppermint essential oil (just because I like the smell). I think I added slightly more cocoa powder after mixing to darken it up slightly but I didn’t measure that one.

Once all ingredients are mixed well but still liquid, use a dropper to pour into the lip chap container. I used the glass dropper from an old tincture bottle. Fill just below the top as it will expand slightly as it cools. Leave to cool for at least half an hour. Store in a cool place (under 80 degrees) or it will soften.

Enjoy!

Ever made your own cosmetics? How did it go? What hue would you make of this recipe? Share below!