Photo

Steve Penny resigned on Thursday as president of U.S.A. Gymnastics, the sport’s national governing body that is embroiled in a far-reaching sexual-assault scandal.

“My decision to step aside as C.E.O. is solely to support the best interests of U.S.A. Gymnastics at this time,” he said in a statement.

U.S.A. Gymnastics, whose headquarters is in Indianapolis, considers its mission to include selecting and training the Olympic teams and promoting the sport at all levels. Its website says it has more than 174,000 members.

An Indianapolis Star investigation that became public just before the Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro last August found that U.S.A. Gymnastics routinely dismissed warnings and complaints of sexual abuse against dozens of coaches. Further reporting found that at least 368 gymnasts had alleged sexual abuse over the past 20 years. Several dozen gymnasts have alleged that Larry Nassar, the national gymnastics team doctor from 1996 to 2015, sexually abused them, including at Karolyi Ranch in Texas, the official training center of the women’s national team.

Nassar, currently in prison, was fired by U.S.A. Gymnastics in 2015 and faces a wide range of state child sexual abuse charges and federal child pornography charges. Many abuse charges stem from his 20 years as a team doctor at Michigan State.

Penny and U.S.A. Gymnastics, accused of negligence, are named as defendants in several civil lawsuits, including one against Nassar by the 2000 Olympian Jamie Dantzscher.

Penny had received sturdy support from the board of U.S.A. Gymnastics. Chairman Paul Parilla was one of several executives, along with the former Olympic gymnast Mary Lou Retton, who voiced support for Penny in a recent statement.

Photo

“Steve Penny is among the strongest advocates for our athletes and has reported suspected instances of abuse to law enforcement himself,” the statement said. “He takes their safety seriously, and over the course of his tenure as C.E.O., has strengthened U.S.A. Gymnastics policies and programs to further protect the health and well-being of athletes.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Sports Newsletter Get the big sports news, highlights and analysis from Times journalists, with distinctive takes on games and some behind-the-scenes surprises, delivered to your inbox every week. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Others, including the 1996 Olympian Dominique Moceanu, have called for Penny to resign.

Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, and 15 co-sponsors crafted a bill that would make it a federal crime for national governing bodies to not report allegations of child sexual abuse.