Your body is not a machine, and you shouldn't treat it like one even if you think you can "tough it out." You need to put as much care and consideration on your recovery as you do your workouts. Here are some common running mistakes that can compound the stress you're placing on your body.

This post originally appeared on Strength Running.

Flash back ten years ago: I was tearing through 80 mile weeks as a cocky 19 year old. But disaster was right around the corner.

Advertisement

I really had no idea what I was doing. My college coach gave us flexibility with our mileage and I was running too much, too soon, too fast. The "little things" that help you stay healthy were an afterthought. Having a coach is an amazing opportunity but in college they're responsible for 20+ runners during a 2-hour practice. You often don't get the personal attention that you get with a private, 1-on-1 coach.

So I ran myself into the ground. I reached 90 miles per week and then was forced to recover (slowly) from IT band syndrome. This was after chronic Achilles tendinopathy ruined my spring track season. Later that year I'd have a string of other injuries.

I was locked in the injury cycle and had no idea what to do. It was frustrating; I thought I was doing everything right.

Advertisement

Fast forward to today: I ran over 350 miles in July and haven't had a serious injury in over four years. Injury-free training has created a consistency I could only have dreamed of while I was in the "dark ages" of my running career. My marathon time improved to 2:39 and I've since won a marathon and Warrior Dash.

I tell you this so you know that I was fragile and prone to overuse injuries. I used to be just like many people who don't know b but I've learned how to "crack the code" of my own personal injury cycle.

Since then, I've been working with runners to help them do the same. A lot of my readers have expressed interest in injury prevention, and I'm so excited because it's possibly the most powerful way to become a better runner.

Imagine what you could accomplish if you could stay healthy? The results can be incredible—just look at my friend Sarah's improvement, for example.

The lessons I've learned over the years could fill a book, but today I want to share the common injury blunders that keep runners locked in their own injury cycle.

Treating Your Body Like a Machine

You're not Darth Vader (more machine than man!). The adaptation process takes longer than you think—months in most cases. And if you don't respect that process you'll break down and get hurt.

Advertisement

Whenever you do a hard workout, you actually reduce your fitness level and create a lot of damaged muscles. That's why your fitness is decreased in this visual guide to the Stress Adaptation Cycle:

When most runners train for a race, they increase their mileage or run faster and longer workouts every week. The thinking goes, "If I ran this much last week, I can increase it this week right?"

Nope!

There needs to be recovery time built in to every training plan.

Instead of always pushing forward with more miles, faster workouts, and longer speed sessions, it's best to take a long-term outlook on your training. Short-term thinking almost always results in trying to "catch up" and do more than your body is ready to handle.

Advertisement

Muscles, bones, tendons, and ligaments are tissues that break down with use. Don't treat your legs like components of a machine.

Being Too Impatient and Forcing Progress

A natural extension of running too much, too soon is having a complete lack of patience.

Advertisement

I love that I'm able to talk with runners all the time. But sometimes I cringe:

I haven't run in a year—can I get ready for a half marathon in 10 weeks? My diagnosis was a stress fracture but I'd really like to run my local 10k this weekend. Can I do it? My weekly mileage is seven and my goal race is the New York City Marathon in eight weeks.

I could be your cheerleader and tell you that running is all cuddles, kittens, and rainbows.

Advertisement

But it's not. Running is hard. It's a contact sport between you and the ground and it can cause some serious damage.

I try to help people become a better runner—healthier, faster, stronger, and free of injuries. Sometimes that means being brutally honest. And many of you are wildly impatient!

Good runners think long-term and put in the work month after month. They don't care that they're not ready to race this weekend—they're more interested in building the fitness they need six months from now.

Advertisement

It's a different mindset, but it's often the difference between those who are chronically injured and consistently healthy.

Not Doing Any Strength Exercises

I've written about strength work and its value for injury prevention for years. And it amazes me when long-time readers admit that they never do their strength work. One of the things that I'm know for are the strength routines that help runners stay healthy. The Standard Warm-up and ITB Rehab Routine are two of the most popular.

Understandably, there are a lot of questions about what to do.

What are the specific exercises I should do for my specific injury? How often should I do the exercises? How many reps of each one? Can you show me a video of the routine? Is there a text version of the instructions?

Stick to the Standard Warm-up before your run and the ITB Rehab Routine and Standard Core Routine after your runs. You can see me demonstrate it here:

It's not sexy training but it's damn effective.

Repetitive Training = Repetitive Stress

A better term for "running injury" is really "repetitive stress injury." Let's admit it: the sport that we love is pretty repetitive. It's just running, all the time!

Advertisement

If you repeat the same movement a thousand—or tens of thousands—of times, your risk of an overuse injury skyrockets. And some runners make it worse: they wear the same shoes, run the same pace every day, the same distance runs, and never vary their workout routine.

But by introducing more variety into our training we can cut this cycle and reduce that repetition. There are countless options:

Run many different paces

Wear 2-3 shoes in rotation

Vary the elevation profile of your runs

Run on different terrain

Schedule many types of workouts

Train for different goal races

Cross-train

Run on different surfaces

All of these factors impact the stresses your body experiences. And you can manipulate all of them. Did your foot start hurting when running paved hill repeats in your Newtons yesterday? Then today wear a different shoe on trails and keep the terrain flat.

Advertisement

This subtly changes how impact is distributed through your legs, how you strike the ground, and how you move as you run. Often these little variations are all you need to keep a little niggle from developing into a serious injury.

Reduce the repetition and you'll be able to reduce your injury rate. It's worked for me and has helped thousands of runners just like you.

Training Harder in Order to Run Faster

If you want to race faster, you have to train faster. Or so many people think.

Surprisingly, many runners are running too fast during training and aren't recovering properly between workouts. Fatigue is then carried into a long run or faster workout, causing a mediocre performance.

Advertisement

The result? Every run during the week is a moderate effort. There are no very hard days and certainly no easy days.

When I started working with Sarah this was one of her mistakes. She thought she had to work harder (instead of smarter) and was surprised when I reduced her fast workouts and had her do fewer cross-training sessions.

What Sarah did—and you should too—is to make your hard days harder but your easy days easier. In fact, sports writer Matt Fitzgerald just tweeted about a study that showed runners improve their 10K time more with a 77%/3%/20% low/medium/high training intensity distribution than with a 46%/35%/19% breakdown. What do those numbers mean? Simply put, reduce the moderate days and make more of your runs easy!

Advertisement

Keep these common blunders in mind and you'll be better off. You aren't a machine and shouldn't over-exert yourself all the time.

5 Running Blunders That Keep You Locked in the Injury Cycle | Strength Running

Jason Fitzgerald is a 2:39 marathoner and USATF-certified running coach at Strength Running. Get his latest coaching advice and free injury prevention course here.

Image adapted from whiteisthecolor (Shutterstock).