393.2K Shares Share this Post Share Tweet Share Share Share Share Share Email

Zodiacs have been an important part of human being’s society for ages. While some may be skeptical, there is a lot that you can learn, just based on the month you were born in.

One of these things is what woman may be the perfect match for you. If you’re thinking about getting married anytime soon, check out the three Zodiac below to see if your lady fits the bill.

Cancer

Image Courtesy: Pixabay

This is a woman who is not afraid to wear her emotions on her sleeve. Above all else, the happiness of others is the most important thing; and she will stop at nothing to make sure that happiness is achieved for those she loves. If you are lucky enough to have a Cancer in your life, know that she will go the extra mile to make sure you are truly happy.

The only downside of this sign is that, due to the very emotional personality of a Cancer, there is a high chance drama will take place. Whether or not it is a big situation or a little one, this woman is sure to make it a bigger deal than necessary.

However, this small negative mark is nothing compared to all the other great qualities a Cancer woman possesses. As home makers and doting wives, Cancers love to make a cozy home to live in and great food to eat. You will never need to worry about boring meals if you marry a woman like this.

When it comes to children, a Cancer will put them first before anything because they are her most precious possessions. This woman looks for love and honesty in a husband.

Aries

Image Courtesy: Pixabay

If you are thinking about marrying an Aries, prepare yourself for some serious dedication. This woman is extremely hard headed and stubborn with a very goal driven personality.

Due to the fact that you managed to get one to notice you at all is a feat in and of itself! Just remember that you will always need to work on keeping things interesting, because an Aries woman will expect you to be supportive and interesting.

This woman is down-to-earth and expect the best from those around them. Because of this they are very successful and will make you successful as well.

As a mother this woman is very strict, and will not expect anything better than perfection from her children. This attitude helps to raise leaders and over-achievers.

When it comes to a man, an Aries woman looks for strong characteristics that mirror her own; such as persistence, determination, and strength.

Leo

Image Courtesy: Pixabay

A woman with a sword for a tongue, the Leo doesn’t take no for an answer. With a tendency to be harsh and straightforward, you can believe they need a strong man for a partner. This woman is extremely charming and her independent nature draws men to her like flies.

Even though she may be hard to get along with at times, you will never find a more loyal and dedicated partner than a Leo. She knows exactly what pure, true love should look like and will do her best to treat you the best that she can with that same love.

The best thing about this woman, is that she uses her strength to fight for her partner fiercely. A Leo woman is the perfect example of hunting lioness or a mama bear; no one messes with her family. She will do whatever it takes to protect those she loves.

Without a doubt this woman has a large heart with a natural inner strength. When looking for a man, a Leo woman will want someone who can match their strength with her own, but who will respect her enough not to use it.