My cabin at Playa Escondida was rustic but charming. A stairway led from a stone path to the second floor of the hardwood and bamboo structure where my bed, protected by a mosquito net, occupied the center of the open-air platform. I awoke each morning with a near 360-degree view of the surrounding mangroves and, beyond, the sea.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On my second day I met Glenn Herbert and Marilyn Cooper at breakfast as we all admired the lapping waves of the ocean at high tide. Mr. Herbert and Ms. Cooper, American retirees, were on vacation from their home in Otavalo, north of Quito. Friends had recommended Playa Escondida as the ideal place to relax away from the typically crowded beaches of the Ecuadorean coast.

“It’s calm here,” Mr. Herbert said. “This place is perfect to read and look out at the sea.”

Photo

It’s also home to evidence of the area’s long history. Ms. Barett has found a variety of clay pottery fragments all across the beach and river, remnants of the ancient populations that lived along Ecuador’s coasts and once numbered nearly 100,000.

Esmeraldas’s most famous archaeological site, La Tolita, in the far north of the province, was renowned for its intricate gold funeral masks and anthropomorphic clay figures. But there has been no organized preservation of the site since the best of these artifacts were moved to the Museo del Banco Central in Quito; for now, one is free to walk the shores and discover, as I did, a multitude of pottery shards and broken figurines.

The next morning I hitched a ride to the sleepy fishing village of Qüingüe, an hour down the road from Playa Escondida. As lanchas, small motorized fishing skiffs, landed with the day’s catch, I hiked along the beach toward La Peña de la Virgen, a 200-foot natural waterfall that empties into the ocean, alone save for a group of schoolchildren playing in the shallows with their teacher.

All along the beach were caves tucked into the rocky cliffs and jade-colored stones scattered. A line of sea birds dipped low, brushing webbed feet along the surface of the water. After a half-hour, I reached the cascade; although it was the dry season, it was still impressive — two solid streams of water dropping and coursing along a sharp ridge to the sand.

Photo

Esmeraldas isn’t a brand-new discovery for travelers, of course. Moritz Thomsen, an American who went to Ecuador in the early 1960s as a Peace Corps volunteer, fell in love with the region and its people. He never left. “The province of Esmeraldas still lives in the minds of the ruling Quiteños as a wild and barbarous area,” he wrote in his masterpiece, “The Farm on the River of Emeralds.” “Of course it is; that is its principal charm.”

Resting on the beach, enjoying the waterfall alone, I saw a fisherman, small in the distance, mending the tattered edge of a shrimp net, and understood what Thomsen meant. To travelers who risk the wild, a sort of paradise can await.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After three days in Playa Escondida I headed to Mompiche, long known as the home of a perfect left break considered one of the best surfing waves in Ecuador. Several years ago a paved road connecting the sleepy fishing village to the coastal highway was completed. When I arrived it became clear the town had matured since my last visit five years ago when there were only a few simple bamboo and thatch hotels lining the waterfront. Now there were many new buildings and hotels and even, because of the encroaching sea, a sea barrier of giant boulders and a paved boardwalk.

I headed to Cabañas Iruñas, a hotel a couple of miles from the main town and accessible only at low tide. Teresa Barrera, the friendly owner, offered to pick me up but I opted to walk along the pale sand instead. Iruñas is small but charming, with six cabins of varying size and a restaurant portico at the back of the property. Juan Carlos, who cares for the palm trees that dot the property, saw me staring at their green coconuts from the deck of my cozy cabana and offered me one, cutting off the top in three swift machete chops.

Photo

That night, candles flickered at the deck restaurant as Daniel Facchin, an Argentine, and Javier Cortez, a Colombian, cooked up the fishermen’s catch. Over the course of a few days I ate giant prawns, each the size of a hand, and tender blue marlin steaks served in a coconut broth. A salad of beet, pineapple, bibb lettuce and sweet onion that accompanied a main course was as impressive as any I had eaten in New York.

It was easy to see how foreigners like Mr. Fachin found themselves here. “I came to Ecuador in 2004 to surf for a month,” he told me, looking wistfully out into the darkness as he smoked a cigarette. “A friend told me about Mompiche; there is the perfect wave here. So I came and I ended up staying two and a half years. I opened a hostel and then sold it. I’m back now for a few months to surf but am getting the idea to stay again.”

Mompiche is also the site of the most luxurious resort in the sleepy Emerald province, the Royal Decameron, which sits high on a hill overlooking the beach of Porteté, a 10-minute drive from Mompiche.

I checked into one of the resort’s pastel-colored rooms, carved into the hillside in concentric rings; the ocean view from my large, airy room was postcard perfect. But soon it began to feel like a cruise ship permanently docked — buffet upon buffet, children running about the pools, a video game lounge, nightly variety show, organized pool-volleyball games, nightly karaoke. I checked out the next day.

As I waited back in Mompiche for a bus to take me to the capital, a quote from Moritz Thomsen’s first book, “Living Poor,” about his early days as a volunteer in Ecuador, returned to me: “I remembered standing on the beach looking north along that sweeping stretch of sand and breakers, everything softened in an ocean haze, and thinking that it was quite like paradise.”