When Durant left last summer, some fans speculated that Westbrook might have a chance to pull this madness off. Rational people, myself included, responded with scornful laughter. It was absurd, particularly for a player who was only 6-foot-3 and surrounded by mediocre shooters. To actually average a triple-double would be not only historic and impressive but also a little weird, almost disturbing.

But this is where we have to take into account Russell Westbrook’s personality.

“He’s a different dude,” Anthony Morrow, a Thunder shooting guard, told me.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“He’s weird, yeah,” Steven Adams said. He paused. “Bizarre.” He paused again. “Not normal.”

Westbrook is not merely a superelite athlete (he is commonly referred to as the most athletic player in the N.B.A.); he also has a highly unusual mind. He is moody, stubborn, loyal and fiercely private, a control freak and a perfectionist. Outside a very small circle of family and friends, he refuses to be known. The triple-doubles, their sheer unreasonableness, are as much a reflection of this personality as of any particular basketball skills. Each time he registers one it is like a signal — a ping from the sealed box of his private mind.

Russell Westbrook III grew up 1,300 miles from Oklahoma City, in Los Angeles. He was born in 1988, under the smiling moon of Magic Johnson. Westbrook’s father, Russell Westbrook Jr., worked at a bread factory and played basketball in his free time on the local playgrounds. When I asked Westbrook III what kind of player his dad was, he burst into laughter.

“Player?” he said. “Player!?” It was as if he had never thought of his father that way before. “Man, they argued the whole time,” he said. “That’s what I remember most. They played for five minutes and argued for 40 minutes. All day.”

Westbrook’s father was strict and devoted, determined above all to keep his family out of the way of trouble. When Westbrook showed an interest in basketball, his father devised endless drills that they ran through, just the two of them, for hours at a time. They focused on the midrange jumper, the cotton shot, practicing it off one foot and two feet, on the move and standing still. Westbrook learned to identify all the possible ways you can mess the shot up: being off balance, moving too fast, not having your feet set. “A lot of times, I make it when those things are not right,” he said. “That’s all my dad. That’s all him and myself, basically.”

Westbrook constantly invokes his family — his parents, his brother, his wife — to explain why he is the way he is, but he won’t allow reporters to talk to them. When I asked if I could speak with his father or brother, he told me he would ask his mother instead — and then added, immediately: “My mom never talks. She never talks. She doesn’t like to talk.” (I never spoke with her.)

As a high school player, Westbrook was spectacularly unheralded. He was the shortest kid on his team, not even able to dunk until his senior year. Although he already possessed most of the qualities that would eventually make him great — the crazy speed and fearlessness, the motor that never stopped — basketball was fundamentally a game of size, and Westbrook didn’t have it. A lifetime of arguing on playgrounds looked as if it might be his best case.

Then came a miraculous growth spurt. Toward the end of high school, Westbrook shot up seven inches, from 5-foot-8 to 6-foot-3. Suddenly, all his intangible gifts were attached to formidable size. Westbrook was still not an elite recruit — it was too late for that — but he was good enough to earn a last-minute scholarship to U.C.L.A. after one of its star players declared unexpectedly for the N.B.A. draft. Westbrook was a bench player, a defensive specialist; his job was to enter the game and wreak havoc. During his freshman year, he averaged only nine minutes and 3 points a game. That same year, at the University of Texas, the freshman Kevin Durant was playing 36 minutes a game and averaging 26 points and 11 rebounds — by many reckonings, the greatest freshman year in N.C.A.A. basketball history.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

During his sophomore year, Westbrook played more of a central role at U.C.L.A., and his powerful dunks made him a hero of ESPN highlight reels. Still, no one was in danger of confusing him with Kevin Durant, who was by then winning N.B.A. Rookie of the Year. Westbrook’s second-year averages remained relatively modest — 13 points, four assists, four rebounds — but it was enough to entice the Seattle SuperSonics (soon to be, scandalously, the Oklahoma City Thunder) to take him in the 2008 N.B.A. draft. They picked him fourth, a position almost everyone else thought was a serious reach. As a Seattle Times columnist put it the day after the draft: “Equipped with two first-round picks, they came away with Westbrook and Serge Ibaka. That’s like getting two free airline tickets and booking trips to Gary, Ind., and Kosovo.” No one was more surprised on draft night than Westbrook himself, who was afraid he wasn’t going to be picked at all. “I was like: Damn, am I gonna be the only one left in the greenroom?” he told me. “This is about to be embarrassing.”

In theory, in the beginning, Westbrook and Durant seemed like a perfectly complementary pair: the scrappy defensive specialist next to the once-in-a-generation scorer. Westbrook could defer to Durant on offense and cover his shortcomings on defense. Instead, Westbrook took over the team.

He had few of the skills that defined a traditional point guard: panoramic vision, flawless ball-handling, a deadly outside shot. But his personality was more suited to leading than Durant’s was. This, in fact, was a major part of why the team drafted Westbrook, for his unique psychological profile: his ability to withstand crushing stress and pressure and doubt without losing confidence or focus. Many of Westbrook’s elite skills were mental, and he would need them right away. The Thunder started his rookie season 3-29, and there were serious debates about whether they were the worst team ever. Westbrook led the league in turnovers, and the team’s ownership was widely reviled for stealing the franchise from Seattle. Even when the Thunder’s fortunes changed the following season, when they made the playoffs and almost beat the world-champion Lakers, and then the following season, when Westbrook averaged 22 points a game and became an All-Star and the team made it all the way to the Western Conference finals — even then, it wasn’t particularly easy. A narrative was beginning to develop: Westbrook was a volatile, reckless ball hog, an inferior player who refused to defer to the clearly superior Durant.

Mo Cheeks is the Russell Westbrook whisperer. Cheeks was a legendary 1980s point guard for the 76ers, an unheralded prospect who turned himself, through the power of scrappiness, into a recurrent All-Star and an N.B.A. champion, the point guard for Dr. J and Moses Malone and Charles Barkley. Cheeks joined the Thunder as an assistant coach in Westbrook’s second year, and Westbrook has been his special assignment ever since.

Early on, Cheeks and other coaches bullied Westbrook around the floor while he dribbled to improve his ball-handling. When Westbrook had emotional outbursts in the middle of games, Cheeks was the one to talk him down. They still work together early every morning: Westbrook is always the first player to the gym, hours before practice starts, and he will pull Cheeks out of the morning coaches’ meeting so they can run through shooting and post moves.

“He’s a driven man,” Cheeks told me. “He’s a very disciplined person. Never late, always on time.”

Photo

I asked Cheeks if he’d ever been around a player like Westbrook.

“I — I — I don’t know many with that explosiveness,” he said. “The power and the speed.”

What about Barkley? Or Allen Iverson?

“Charles was powerful, but he didn’t have the speed of this guy,” Cheeks said. “Iverson’s a good name. He played like that — that same ferociousness, same competitive drive.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But Iverson, infamously, was not a fan of practice, and Westbrook treats every practice as if it’s Game 7 of a playoff series. This is something that surprised Billy Donovan, the Thunder’s head coach, when he joined the organization last season. Even at the beginning of a morning walk-through, when the coaches were just trying to get everyone loosened up, Westbrook would take his first touch of the ball and explode as if he’d been shot out of a cannon to throw down a tomahawk dunk. He is like this always. “We play 82 games,” Donovan said. “There are gonna be nights when your team just doesn’t have it. Four games in five nights, you’re tired, you’re beaten down, it’s a long trip, there’s flight issues. Russell is so unique that it doesn’t happen to him. It’s nuts.”

“This is my 39th year,” Cheeks said. “I’ve asked many people, and no one really has had an explanation for this guy. This guy plays with power and speed all the time. Like, all the time. This is kind of a ‘cool’ league. You don’t play like that all the time. He does it all the time. Practice. Preseason games. A lot of guys make the All-Star team, but how many have been two-time All-Star M.V.P.?”

The answer is: Several, but only Russell Westbrook has been unreasonable enough to do it in consecutive years. “I don’t think I’m good enough to relax and be cool,” Westbrook told me. “Just be chillin’ and be cool.”

I asked Semaj Christon, one of the Thunder’s backup point guards, what it was like to guard Westbrook in practice every day.

“It’s a problem,” he said.

“It’s not fun,” Anthony Morrow told me. “I done seen him literally hurt people, on offense, and it’s not an offensive foul.”

In the swirling cloud of contradiction that surrounds Westbrook, one paradox stands out. He often looks, on the court, like a force of pure chaos: a wild, petulant, fire-breathing hothead. And yet he is also, especially in his personal life, relentlessly devoted to order and control. He builds his days around a series of inflexible routines: calls to his parents, a designated parking spot, morning shooting on Court 3. He expects every room to be neat and clean, at work and at home.

Before games, Westbrook always eats a peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwich, and it must be prepared just so: bread cut on a diagonal, fillings spread very thin. (In Oklahoma, the team chefs know exactly how to do it, but on the road Westbrook can’t trust anyone, so he makes it himself.) Three hours before tipoff, Westbrook warms up; at T-minus-60 minutes he goes to chapel. When the pregame countdown clock hits precisely 6:17 — never a second more or less — Westbrook leaps off the Thunder’s bench and screams, “Two lines,” initiating the team’s final layup drill. I asked Westbrook if there was some kind of numerology behind this — a June 17 birthday, a favorite Bible verse. “No particular reason,” he said. “I just do it. Nothing special.”

Westbrook is unbelievably attuned to the tiniest details of his shoes. He has his own personal rack at the practice facility. “Most guys, I can just bring a pair of shoes,” the Thunder’s equipment manager, Wilson Taylor, told me. “Russell wants a certain pair. He knows which are for games, which are for practice. He determines which shoes are coming on a road trip.” When Nike sent Westbrook its latest model, the Jordan 31, he wasn’t happy with the sole flexibility, so he asked the company to build him a special hybrid using the previous model’s sole. Even in that custom shoe, however, the insoles aren’t thick enough for Westbrook, so Taylor replaces each of them by hand.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

On the court, what looks like madness is often deliberate. Westbrook is obsessive about studying film. He insists on knowing every play from every position. Steven Adams told me that Westbrook occasionally wakes him up in the middle of the night, on the team plane, to show him an angle he might have missed. “I ain’t gonna lie, bud,” Adams said. “Watching video, especially after a game, at like 2 in the morning — it’s rather hard to stay up. He maintains the same focus. It’s amazing.”

Everyone had stories like these. I got the feeling that Westbrook’s personality, the sheer intensity of his presence, is an energy field that seeps into every square centimeter of the Thunder organization. When Westbrook is around, everyone is aware of him, and he is never not around. Players arrive at the gym in the morning to find Westbrook already there. Sometimes they come in at night to put up extra shots, and Westbrook will already be there again, in the weight room, working out. You can begin to imagine how Kevin Durant, a talent with equal or greater claim to the organization but not nearly Westbrook’s force of personality, might have been driven to look for his own space elsewhere.

Although everyone who works with Westbrook gushes about him endlessly — he is loyal and generous and as real as a human could ever possibly be, they say — he also has a talent for keeping the people around him slightly on edge. He has a foulmouthed, teasing charm, and a formidableness that makes people think twice, and often a third and fourth time, before mentioning something they’re not sure he’ll like. Perhaps this tension is another way Westbrook has found to maintain focus, in himself and in others — the social equivalent of grinding a blade across a rough stone to keep it sharp.

I first met Westbrook while writing an article for this magazine in 2012, and we did not exactly hit it off. He kept me waiting for over an hour for an interview that was spectacularly unproductive; despite my best efforts to keep our conversation going, it petered out in less than 10 minutes, some of which time Westbrook actually spent on the phone telling a friend that he was currently doing an interview but would be done with it very soon. It felt almost as if he were performing some kind of art project.

He shut down questions with ruthless efficiency. The P.R. staff had mentioned to me that Westbrook was famous in the organization for giving everyone nicknames: Alfalfa, Ace Ventura, Snakes on a Plane. I asked him what nicknames he’d given his teammates.

“Those are my secrets,” he said. “I don’t let out secrets.”

The most revealing thing took place afterward, when Westbrook went into the P.R. office to banter with the staff. He sat down to look over a stack of contracts. (Westbrook handles most of his own business; he often sits in the back of the practice facility to pay his bills.) He admired a new addition to the room — a big, free-standing, color-coded season schedule — and asked the P.R. guys if he could have it. They said no, they were using it to plan the season, but they would be happy to get another one printed out especially for him. Westbrook asked why he couldn’t just take this one right now, and then they could get another schedule printed for themselves. That way he wouldn’t have to wait. He was the player, he said. Shouldn’t he have priority?

Photo

Even in the middle of the P.R. office, in other words, Westbrook was having a P.R. problem. He was being a jerk. Watching this performance in person, however, even immediately after my unsuccessful interview, I could see why everyone liked him anyway. Westbrook wasn’t only a jerk, or at least not uncomplicatedly a jerk. By traditional social standards, saying the things Westbrook was saying is bad manners. But that’s in the same way that, by traditional basketball standards, it’s a bad idea to charge into a one-on-four fast break and pull up for a contested free-throw-line jumper. He was a social gambler as well as a basketball gambler, one of those people who know how to play on the line between charisma and rudeness, teasing and affection, especially among people he likes.

Westbrook started to sign his stack of documents. He held the pen in his left hand.

“Little-known fact about Russell,” one of the P.R. guys said to me. “He shoots with his right hand, it says he’s right-handed in the media guide, but he writes with his left.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Westbrook’s head snapped up. He looked straight at me, where I was leaning against the door frame.

“Don’t put that in your article,” he said.

I told him we could make a deal: I would keep it out of my article if he would tell me one of his teammates’ nicknames.

“You don’t get to bargain with me,” Westbrook said — and then he added a curse word with so much venom it made me laugh out loud. He went back to signing papers with his left hand.

A month into the 2016 season, Westbrook arrived in New York agonizingly close to the impossible Oscar Robertson dream: averaging a triple-double. The only stat holding him back was rebounding. He was at 9.9 per game — an extremely high number, historic in itself for a point guard of his size, frankly a little unrealistic. But still: single digits. The statisticians had crunched and crunched and determined that at Madison Square Garden that night, Westbrook would need to pull down 11 rebounds in order to get his average up to 10.

Rebounding has always been one of Westbrook’s superpowers. He is athletic enough to leap through vast spaces, strong enough to bully people in close combat and, most important, persistent enough to get himself, with unholy urgency, to the places around the rim most likely to yield rebounds. I have seen Westbrook streak in from a distant corner of the floor to tip in a missed 3-pointer off the glass — a hurtling, perfectly timed run that looked almost like a center fielder’s sprinting back to leap and steal a home run just as it cleared the wall.

In the end, every rebound comes down to one small coordinate somewhere near the basket: a grapefruit of space that materializes suddenly, unpredictably, and then disappears in a second, almost like the golden snitch in quidditch. Westbrook is frighteningly good at getting to that elusive point before anyone else, almost regardless of his starting position, and making it his own. He owns the grapefruit of space.

“Some of these rebounds over power forwards and centers — that’s will,” Morrow told me. “You see it in his eyes. It’s just a level of focus and will that I have never seen before. Never. Nobody. I’ve been around a lot of focused dudes, but to be consistently like that — that’s crazy.”

At Madison Square Garden, Westbrook needed 11 rebounds to cross the sacred threshold, and started with the Knicks’ first shot: It came off the back of the rim, and Westbrook casually took it out of the air with his left hand. Three minutes later, a 3-pointer rattled in and out and popped directly into Westbrook’s hands. The ball seemed to seek him out, over and over, and when it didn’t, he was perfectly willing to go out of his way to get it. In the second quarter, Westbrook rained down a storm of stats on the Knicks that included a series of crucial and difficult rebounds, several of which looked even more impressive because they came at the expense of Kristaps Porzingis, New York’s gigantic young center, who at 7-foot-3 is a full foot taller than Westbrook. Twice, Porzingis blocked Westbrook’s shot only to see Westbrook end up with the ball; another time, Westbrook sprang off both feet and violently snatched a rebound out of Porzingis’s very high hands.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

By the end of the first half, Westbrook had already collected nine rebounds and was on the brink of a triple-double, which Knicks fans were openly cheering for him to get. The triple-double arrived 79 seconds into the second half, at which point the journalists around me started tweeting furiously that, at only 20 minutes of game action, it was the fastest triple-double of the modern era — until the Thunder P.R. staff pointed out that, as a matter of fact, Westbrook did one the previous year in under 18 minutes. (Westbrook now holds the second-, third- and fourth-fastest triple-doubles in N.B.A. history.)

Even with his triple-double secured, Westbrook would not stop rebounding. My favorite of the night was his 14th: he drove, drew three defenders, passed to a teammate for a wide-open jump shot and ended up deep out of bounds. Instead of just hanging out there, admiring his handiwork, Westbrook turned, tracked the shot with his eyes, saw that it was falling short and, at precisely the moment the ball hit the front of the rim, exploded into the air with shocking intensity. It did not look like a normal professional basketball player trying to get his hand on a ball to extend a possession late in the third quarter of the 19th game of the season. It looked like a man in the middle of a winner-takes-all dunk contest against the Devil himself to prevent the incineration of planet Earth. It looked as if Westbrook were insulted by the very concept of distance, and so he annihilated it, soaring and spearing the ball out of the air from between two waiting Knicks. Spike Lee, courtside, was standing to celebrate the initial missed shot, but when Westbrook came flying in to seize it, he clutched his head in exasperation and hopelessness and despair.

By the time the game ended, Westbrook had 27 points, 14 assists and 17 rebounds — far more than he needed. He was officially averaging a triple-double, and then some.

This came in the middle of what would turn out to be a streak of seven straight games with triple-doubles — a feat so outrageous it was last done by Michael Jordan in 1989. Westbrook and his numbers became a leaguewide spectacle. A few weeks later, after hundreds of questions about it, Westbrook expressed annoyance at the whole phenomenon.

“Honestly, man,” he told reporters, “this triple-double thing is kind of getting on my nerves. People think if I don’t get it, it’s like a big thing. When I do get it, it’s a thing.” He added, “For the 100th time, I don’t care.”

But this of course was hard to believe, because Westbrook cares about everything.

In Oklahoma City in December, on a day off between his triple-doubles, Russell Westbrook sat on the Rolling Thunder Book Bus. This is a staple of the team’s community-outreach program: a school bus that has been converted into a mobile library. That afternoon it was parked, under the wide blue Great Plains sky, in front of a suburban elementary school. Westbrook was there early, long before the kids started lining up, before even the team’s P.R. director arrived. He sat in the bus’s driver’s seat, sheltered from the Oklahoma wind, waiting, passing the time by cranking the tall doors open and closed with a lever near the steering wheel.