Which programming language should you learn first? ʇdıɹɔsɐʌɐɾ :ɹǝʍsuɐ

Most people’s journey toward learning to program starts with a single late-night Google search. Usually it’s something like “Learn ______” But how do they decide which language to search for? “They always joke about Java on Silicon Valley. I guess I should learn that.” Or: “Haskell. So hot right now. Haskell.” Or: “That Go gopher is just so gosh-darn cute.” And then there’s the rest of us. We’ll probably search for something like: “Which programming language should I learn first?” Few questions are so commonly asked that they get the full infographic treatment. But this is one of them:

Deciding on your first programming language can be a fun process — kind of like one of those “Which Quentin Tarantino character are you?” personality quizzes. But before you run off to learn Ruby because you enjoyed playing with Play-Doh as a kid, let me remind you: the stakes are pretty high here. It will take you hundreds of hours of practice to become even remotely competent with your first programming language. So you should consider the following factors: the job market for the language

the long term prospects for the language

how easy the language is to learn

what projects you can build while you’re learning (and share with friends so you can stay motivated) Every year brings new programming languages, and with them, new academic papers. And new web comics. Seriously. Check out this gem from last month: When it comes to choosing a first programming language, there’s no shortage of options. To narrow it down a bit, here are the most common Google searches related to learning programming, over the past 12 years:

Java has had its ups and downs. Python has gradually risen to become the most popular choice. But tucked away below these is the Little Engine That Could, slowly choo-choo’ing up in popularity over the past few years. And that engine is JavaScript. Before I talk about these programming languages, let me clarify: I’m not arguing that any one language is objectively better than any other

I agree that developers should eventually learn more than one language

I’m arguing that first they should learn one language well. And — as you can probably guess from the upside down text in my headline — that language should be JavaScript. Let’s kick things off by exploring how programming is currently taught in school. Computer Science 101 Universities have traditionally taught programming under the umbrella of computer science, which itself is often seen as an extension of mathematics, or tie-in to an electrical engineering degree. Of course, as you may have heard by now: “Computer science education cannot make anybody an expert programmer any more than studying brushes and pigment can make somebody an expert painter.” — Eric S. Raymond As of 2016, many universities still treat programming like it’s computer science, and computer science like it’s math. As a result, many introductory programming courses focus on low-level-of-abstraction languages like C, or mathematically-focused languages like MATLAB. And department chairs generally stay the course, pointing to annual programming language leaderboards like the TIOBE Index, or this one from the IEEE: Most of these leaderboards look virtually identical to how they were 10 years ago. But change does happen. Even in academia. In 2014, Python overtook Java as a the most popular language of instruction at top US Computer Science programs. And yet another change is bound to… eventually… happen. Because if you look at the languages actually used by the workforce, it paints a very different picture: JavaScript is by far the most popular language used by the 49,397 developers who responded to Stack Overflow’s 2016 Survey. More than half of all developers use JavaScript. It’s vital to front-end web development and increasingly relevant for back-end development. And it’s rapidly expanding into areas like game development and the Internet of Things. Job postings also mention JavaScript more than any programming language other than Java:

Data from the world’s largest job posting aggregator, Indeed.com

It’s no accident that we built our open source community’s curriculum around JavaScript. Over the past two years, more than 5,000 people have used Free Code Camp to get their first developer job. I’m not advocating JavaScript because I teach it. I teach JavaScript because it’s the surest path to a first developer job. But is JavaScript right for you? Is it worthy of being your first programming language? Let’s explore those factors I mentioned earlier. Factor #1: The job market If you’re learning to program purely out of intellectual curiosity, feel free to skip this factor. But if you — like the vast majority of people learning to program — want to use this skill to get a job, this is an important consideration. As I mentioned earlier, Java is mentioned in more job postings than any other programming language. JavaScript is a close second. But here’s the thing about JavaScript: even though it’s been around for 20 years, it only recently became a serious tool that companies like Netflix, Walmart, and PayPal would build entire applications around. As a result, plenty of companies are hiring JavaScript developers, but there just aren’t that many on the job market.

Data from Indeed.com