To use this plagiarism checker, please copy and paste your content in the box below, and then click on the big green button that says “Check Plagiarism!” then sit back and watch as your article is scanned for duplicated content.

How the Plagiarism Check Tool Works:

The article you entered is scanned carefully, and so is the world wide web. It’s very likely you’ll see some red in your results as common phrases may trigger red flags. If there are complete sentences that aren’t original, this tool will identify the original source of any unoriginal or plagiarized content that was copied from the internet.

Understanding the results:

Phrases or sentences shown in red already exist online and will not pass Google plagiarism tests.

They are also links … feel free to click on any red lines and see the original source for your records. When the test is done, you’ll also be given an exact percentage that tells you how original or unique your article is.

Advertisement

Duplicated content results in a lower page rank. If you publish an article or web page content that is not entirely unique and original, there is a significantly higher risk of being blacklisted by Google and other search engines. So, if your goal is to have a higher page rank– and search engine results placement (SERP) — then it’s simply not worth the risk of publishing heavily duplicated content. Right?

While this free plagiarism checker may be used for checking rewritten or spun content to eliminate consistencies (and raise the unique value of each article) its benefits aren’t restricted to black and gray hat seo techniques. In fact, white hat seo specialists rely on this free plagiarism checker to make darn sure their freelance writers are submitting work that is 100% original and unique.

You can check content from your own website to make sure nobody else has been ripping you off!

Of course there are a number of great uses for this tool beyond search engine optimization as well. Students often use it to check papers for missing citations before turning their work in. Meanwhile, teachers use this free tool to check for plagiarism in assignments. (It’s a double edged sword, that’s for sure!)

Our free plagiarism software checks sentences one by one on various search engines comparing it with already indexed content. Moreover, our plagiarism detector does not save any content in database. You may signup for free with us and we will update you with our latest developments and improvements in the tools through our newsletter.

Other plagiarism checker tools are limited with the opportunity to “go premium” to unlock the full features. But ours is free. No catch. No strings attached. No membership required … we’re easy like that!

Plagiarism Checker WP Plugin