Some of the greatest human accomplishments have taken place at desks. They’re important places for putting your nose to the grindstone and producing good work. Whether you prefer a spartan desk or a cluttered one, a desk pad can improve your workspace and get your creative, productive juices flowing. On top of that, they can make beautiful what was once boring, rugged what was once delicate and smooth what was once rough. These are our five favorite desk pads and mats.

Saddleback Leather Pad

Most Rustic: Saddleback Leather are a small but ambitious company on the verge of leadership in handmade leather goods. From their wallets to this unexpected product from them, they exude quality craftsmanship. Their desk pads come in three sizes, from mouse pad to the real deal, and increase in price accordingly.



Artist KrystalView Desk Pad

Best for Disappearing: Smooth out the business cards and family photos and protect that nice wood finish with this practically invisible plastic sheet. Its hard surface is comfortable for writing and it will resist the scratches that your desk won’t.



Alvin Cutting Mats

The Toughest: Cutting mats make great desk protectors and give an organized feel to a workspace. This product from Alvin is particularly nice, and functions as a great writing surface and mousepad, and generally just makes a desk into a great place to get things done. We have a particular affinity for them here at GP.



Ampad Plain Desk Pad

Best for Doodlers: Creativity often starts with getting an idea down. PostIts (whether on your iMac or with a sticky back) work fine, but covering your whole desk with paper changes the game. Need to doodle? Do it on your desk. Need to remember something? Do it on your desk. Need a clean slate? Rip off the whole sheet and start over.



Satechi Desk Mat & Mate

Most Universal: This pad is made affordable with synthetic rather than real leather, and functions well as a writing surface or mouse pad. It comes in all the colors you could want, so matching it to your style shouldn’t be a problem.



GroveMade Walnut Monitor Stand