At night, I’ll use the Neutrogena makeup remover wipes. It even gets the waterproof stuff off. I also found these masks at Sephora that all my friends are using. I’m obsessed with them. On the shelf there are a million of them — Sephora makes them — so you can try different ones. They’re so much fun.

Makeup

If I’m going to see people, I won’t wear heavy makeup. It’s not attractive on me. When you see those pictures on my Instagram, they are usually for when I’m doing a photo shoot or an interview. Every time I get my makeup professionally done, I take a photo.

I do love lashes and lip liner and a light foundation and bronzer, though. My usual go-to is the Charlotte Tilbury Light Wonder foundation. You can still see my skin through it. Then I use Nars Orgasm blush. For my lashes, I like to go to CVS and explore all the falsies. I used to be obsessed with heavy lashes, but now I just want to find something super clean and light. I like the Wispies ones.

Photo

Mascara, I’ve been using Lancôme Hypnôse Drama. And Anastasia Beverly Hills has this contour kit that’s just easy, and everything is there. The woman who founded it, Anastasia Soare, also does my eyebrows. She does all my sisters’ brows. I really love the Anastasia concealer. I like my concealer to have a bit of pink in it because it brightens the area up.

For bronzer, I’ve been using the Kardashian bronzer. I use it in the hollow of my cheekbones, the sides of my head, my nose and under my chin. For powder, I use the Bobbi Brown yellow powder that they have. I like yellow because it cancels out any red, and it works really well with my spray tan color.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I like lip liners over lipsticks. I have so many of them from so many different brands, so I just pick the color that works. I’m in the middle of creating my own lip kit, and I’m doing my three favorite colors: nude, a sepia color and a true brown. I’m super quick at this now. I could do this in 10 minutes. But if I’m doing lashes, it’ll take a few extra minutes.

If I do amp it up, I usually go for a lot of illuminator. I love to be super shiny, like that strobing trend that’s happening on Instagram. Anastasia has an awesome highlighter. I love the gold one.

Photo

Fragrance

I don’t really wear perfume. I use Victoria’s Secret sometimes. They have this Coconut Passion spray. But fragrances can give me a bit of a headache.

Hair

I used to wash my hair every day, then people told me that wasn’t good for your hair, so now I try for every other day. I like the Moroccanoil shampoo and conditioner. I used to have really thick hair with a lot of body, but not anymore. About a year and a half ago, I cut it off, and then I kept bleaching it and dying it blue, so that damaged it a bit. Then on my 17th birthday, I shaved half my head, so my underneath is still growing back. It’s still only 50 percent there.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

My natural hair color is brown with a reddish tint. Right now, it’s jet black. I can’t have brown hair for some reason. I don’t think it goes with my skin tone. The second I see it turn brown in the sun, I dye it black, the blacker the better. I get my hair cut by Priscilla Valles. She also puts my extensions in. I only really started wearing extensions when I started my extensions line. Daniel Moon dyes Nicole Richie’s hair, and I love the color she had, this silvery purple. He did my blue color. Next, though, I want to see Tracey Cunningham because I want to go blonde soon. She’s supposed to be the best with blondes.

Other Services

I love my spray tans. I go to Jimmy Coco. If I just want to be tan for one night, sometimes I use the Sally Hansen legs spray. Kimmie Kyees does my nails. I do love my acrylics and long nails, but right now I’m into simple light colors for summer.

I still do Juvéderm for my lips. I go to Dr. Ourian in Beverly Hills. He’s the best, and he’s super natural about it. I was going to somebody before, and it was just looking crazy. I would recommend that anyone who gets it done go for a filler that lasts only two to four months. It’s annoying to keep going back, but you have the option of stopping it.

Diet and Fitness

My sister Kourtney had her third baby recently, and she is on a workout kick to get her body back. She lives up the street, so I’ll join her for a trainer session sometimes.

I also started going to this nutritionist because I was having a bad reaction to dairy. I feel like it made me gain a lot of weight. I’ve now cut out dairy, and it’s helping me get back in shape. Every time I get hungry for a snack during the day, I like to have Justin’s Almond Butter packets. It’s easy.