3.3k Social Pulse Facebook Twitter Pinterest

9 Ways To Support A Culture Of Wellness In Your School

by Ashley McCann

How can you create a culture of wellness in your school or classroom?

General wellness is an important concept for leading a healthy life wrapped up in a generic term. What does wellness look like and how can you encourage it in a class setting? Sketch-noter Sylvia Duckworth created the graphic above to share tips for supporting a culture of wellness in schools.

Children spend a significant amount of each week day in a classroom, making it not only a place to learn academics but also an opportunity to teach life skills that will serve them beyond the schoolyard, like self-care, community involvement, and fostering a sense of connection and belonging.

See also: 10 Meditation Apps For The Classroom

9 Ways To Support A Culture Of Wellness In Your School

1. Listen to student voice and “allow them” to explore and change the education system.

Give students the opportunity to speak up and feel heard by encouraging them to give feedback and provide alternate ideas.

2. Fundraise if you can justify the means to the end in money.

The brainstorming, execution, and selflessness of fundraising for a cause is an important lesson in community activism and the success of accomplishment is its own reward.

3. Teachers and staff lead by example and model healthy behaviors, relationships, and positive interactions.

Be the change you want to see in the world — and start locally. Students should see adults modeling integrity, accountability, and positive communication.

4. Acknowledge and respect the individuality of each unique school community.

Every community is different and those differences must be understood and honored in order to feel a sense of peace and belonging — both in the world and at school.

5. Inspire engagement using fun and meaningful learning activities.

Teaching isn’t about state standards and assessments. Craft lessons that foster curiosity and a true desire to seek knowledge to create a mental environment for a lifelong love of learning.

6. Create an authentic welcoming environment.

Everyone just wants to feel like they belong. Make sure your students know they are seen, heard, and valued as individuals.

7. Ensure easy access to services and support in schools.

Services may be offered, but do students know what that entails and who or how to ask? Outline the help available before help is necessary so they know where to turn.

8. Focus on building and serving the local community.

Contributing to something greater can lead to feeling purposeful and a change of perspective about the circumstances of others. Get involved in community learning projects to model compassion on a grander scale.

See also: 4 Education Strategies for Sustained Community Improvement

9. Create a sense of belonging through meaningful connections.

Help create an environment of engagement and curiosity about others to encourage the development of deeper social relationships.

Wellness is really the lifelong practice of positivity — adopting a positive attitude, enacting positive policies and practices, surrounding yourself with positive people and places, and forming positive partnerships — and it’s never too early (or late!) to start.

9 Ways To Support A Culture Of Wellness In Your School