“That stuck in my head,” Parr says. “California is a big place. How was it not possible?”

In Pursuit of Balance is controversial in wine circles. The name itself is polemical. It seems to imply that those outside its ranks don’t mind if a single attribute of their wines (sweet fruit, perhaps, or alcohol, or the flavors that result from prolonged aging in oak barrels) dominates the rest. Aware that being on the intellectual side of a debate against pure pleasure tends to make his group look severe — the “anti-­flavor elite,” as Parker likes to call them — Parr took the stage in TriBeCa to spread good feelings. “It’s not a movement,” he said. “It’s just a discussion among friends.” Moments later, the moderator of a following panel, Ray Isle of Food & Wine Magazine, pushed back. “I had understood you were actually creating an IPOB church,” he said.

In fact, group members do tend to proselytize, which befits a sectarian splinter group trying to challenge established orthodoxy. They point out that Parker’s influence has been so strong over the past quarter-­century that he has actively altered winemaking techniques — not only in Napa but also in regions from Europe to Australia. To sell expensive bottles, producers needed access to the American market. And to get that, they needed Parker.

In 1978, while working as a lawyer for a Baltimore bank, Parker started a newsletter called The Wine Advocate. The name played off his occupation as an attorney, but it meant more than that. Convinced that many highly regarded producers were passing off thin, unappealing wines as fashionable, he created a 100-­point scoring system and then wielded it like a truncheon. He awarded high numbers to wines that tasted the way he believed good wines ought to taste. He punished others with scores in the 70s and 80s and biting insults to match.

Today, The Wine Advocate, which has some 50,000 subscribers, provides detailed descriptions of wines it rates to help readers gauge if their preferences are similar. Nevertheless, by attaching a precise and easily understood score to the commentary, Parker gives the impression — purposeful or not — that he isn’t merely communicating his personal reaction to each wine but quantifying its intrinsic value. For American consumers, the idea that the quality of various wines can be compared as easily as batting averages or stock quotes has proved irresistible. “People would walk into wine shops with the name of a wine and Parker’s rating, and not one word about the style or character of the wine,” says Michael Mondavi, whose father, Robert, is largely responsible for spreading the fame of Napa Valley wines across America. “Just because of the two digits he’d assigned to it, they’d buy it.”

Parker’s taste has always been broader than his detractors like to admit. “It’s simplistic to say that Bob just wants fruit bombs,” says Jeb Dunnuck, who writes reviews for The Wine Advocate. But the wines that receive Parker’s highest scores — those 98s, 99s and 100s that have turned previously unknown producers into cult favorites — are typically the most intensely flavored and come from places, like Napa, where the grapes are most consistently ripe.

For wine regions in some of the warmer areas around the world, the lure of Parker’s endorsement was overwhelming. “Spain went through a time when a lot of wines were being made a certain way in order to get a score,” Ashley Santoro, the wine director of the Standard East Village restaurant in New York, told me during a break between sessions at the Balance tasting. When local distributors came calling at her former restaurant, they were so certain that Santoro would want their wines, they often assumed she didn’t need to taste them. Parker liked them — what else mattered? “They’d walk in,” Santoro said, “hand me a sheet of paper with a list of scores and say, ‘This got 98.’ ”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As we spoke, a swirl of sommeliers surrounded us, most of them (or so it seemed to me) barely old enough to drink legally. A generation ago, only about five working sommeliers existed in New York. Now they’re everywhere — six alone at a single restaurant, the Modern. Their emergence as independent voices, influenced by their curiosity more than by any pronouncements by Parker or other critics, has helped the Balance group get its wines before a generation of drinkers open to all sorts of guidance. These sommeliers have studied wine as they might otherwise have studied Renaissance art; their ambition is not to compile a wine list but to curate one. As a group, they scorn wines, even tasty ones, that lack a sense of place. If Santoro was going to put a wine from Spain on her list, she said, it should taste Spanish, not like a Spanish version of a California cabernet.

Photo

These days, the bottles that fill lists like Santoro’s are ranging further and further from the Parker-­sanctioned standard. They are likely to be made in some corner of Italy that isn’t known for wine or from a tongue-­twister variety of grape in Croatia or the Caucasus Mountains. They might be bottled without sulfur, which is used by a vast majority of winemakers to ward off bacteria, or aged underground in amphorae. They might look cloudy, or have a slight carbonation, or still be undergoing fermentation. In short, they’re just the sort of quirky (and occasionally faulty) beverages that Parker believed he had driven from the earth, or at least from American wine shops. “The kinds of wines,” says Lulu McAllister, who has developed a cultish following as the wine director for the San Francisco restaurant Nopa, “that my customers are looking for.”

The day after the Balance event in New York, I flew to London to attend the Taste of Greatness Masterclass, held at the Great Hall of the Royal Courts of Justice. This, along with a separate $2,500 dinner at a restaurant with two Michelin stars, was the European portion of The Wine Advocate’s Grand World Tour, an intercontinental series of events in which Parker, whose exhaustive tasting-­and-­writing regimen seems to leave little time for public appearances, could bestow his wisdom to well-heeled wine ­drinkers.

Ten wines, deemed perfect or near-­perfect by Wine Advocate reviewers and validated by Parker’s palate, were poured for some 500 attendees in a room with the majesty of a Gothic cathedral. Despite the absence of food of any kind, not even the crackers or bread often served at such functions to neutralize the flavor of one wine before another is sampled, those attending paid the equivalent of $700 to taste them.

Hefty and bearded, Parker sat on a dais with four other reviewers. “Let me tell you how I find greatness,” he began. He explained the criteria that he believes all great wines share, touchstones that any honest oenophile should endorse. His lofty precepts matched the grandeur of the setting. “We know this wine smells of truffles,” he said at one point. “That’s a good descriptor. But sometimes people think we get carried away because truffles are expensive.” He told of flying home from Bordeaux after tasting the 1982 vintage, which he would praise as the best he had encountered, knowing that he had information the world needed to hear. He was anguished. “Here I am, possessed of all this knowledge,” he recalled thinking. “What if the plane crashes?”

The wines were equally immodest, if such a thing were possible. They represented a broad stylistic range; nobody could complain that Parker appreciates only overly alcoholic, unsubtle wines after sipping the 2011 Latricières-­Chambertin of Lalou Bize-­Leroy or the 1982 Cos d’Estournel. Napa Valley’s Dominus, on the other hand, was undeniably dense. “People say you can never give a wine 100 points,” Parker said. “I disagree completely.” He tasted the Dominus again and pronounced it perfect. “I’m very proud I gave it 100 points,” he said. “It’s as good as it gets.”

Now 67, Parker recently sold control of The Wine Advocate to a group of investors based in Singapore, but he remains its undisputed voice. He has reacted to the growing popularity of wines with modest alcohol, less intense flavor and occasional faults — and the accompanying diminution of his influence — with undisguised aggression. “After 35 years I had thought there was no longer room for revisionist history, outright distortion, deception and clever scams,” he posted on the bulletin board on his website last year.

Slowed by a back injury that has forced him to walk with the aid of two canes, Parker has tried to shift the spotlight at The Wine Advocate toward other reviewers. He referred me to Dunnuck to speak for him. But every so often, his anger at Parr and his sympathizers boils over. “The jihadist movements of non­sulphured wines, green, underripe wines, low alcohol, insipid stuff promoted by the anti-­pleasure police & neo-­anti-­alcohol proponents has run its course as another extreme and useless movement few care about,” he wrote at one point. Though Parr and Hirsch have been careful not to criticize Parker publicly, they have made no secret of their distaste for the style of wine he has come to represent. Occasionally, Parker’s invective back at them turns personal. “No serious person pays any attention to Raj Parr and his zealots,” he wrote, “as it is so obvious they are only trying to sell their own wines.”