We all know that every time a man gives us the once-over, he's probably thinking about sex. But now, science can explain why men are constantly checking us out. Turns out, there's a specific formula for their once-over. Some of it's silly, but most of it you can easily nail.

According to Business Insider, every time a men checks out a woman, he's performing a reproductive fitness assessment. Men were designed to look for key features in women. These features make women attractive because they are associated with good health and fertility. When men notice these features, they are subconsciously thinking, She could have my babies! Making them subconsciously, or very consciously, attracted to you.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Science has proven men to be attracted to women with these six features. According to the data, here's what it takes to be "attractive:"

1. A wider waist-to-hips ratio. A ratio of 7:10 is particularly pleasing, apparently. The waist and hips are related to childbirth, making men think, Those big hips would be great for delivering my baby! This one's pretty obvious — men like small waists and big butts. I guess that would explain why waist-trainers and the Kardashians are trending.

2. A high voice. According to a study cited in the video, a high-pitched voice evokes youthfulness and signifies a small, feminine body, both of which are attractive to men. Let's just say our high-pitched shrieks at the scandalous happenings on the Real Housewives is a sign of evolution at work.

3. Healthy hair. Shiny, full, and long hair is very attractive. Again, it's a sign of health and fertility. And thankfully, very fake-able with regular salon visits and blowouts. Remember, it's for the future of the human race.

4. Smiles. Well obviously, happy people are attractive people. But science has also proven the whiter the teeth, the better.

5. Less makeup. You may think that contouring, layers of eye shadow, and bold lips are making you more beautiful, but it turns out, the natural look is more appealing to men. The video says that men prefer women who use up to 40 percent fewer cosmetics. But it shouldn't take science to tell you that the natural you is the best you.

6. Wearing red. There's a reason red is associated with lust. Scientists have proven that wearing red enhances attraction. In fact, they've found this phenomenon to hold true in other animals as well. Note to self: Dry-clean red dress for Saturday date night.

This all said, there's plenty of counter research that men are just happy to be getting laid at all. One thing's for sure — they're lucky to have us, just the way we are.