1. Confidence is built on accomplishments.

2. Failure is the foundation of success; the more you fail the more you will succeed. Do not fear failure.

3. No amount of schooling or research is a substitute for experience.

4. Overall happiness and success is built on discipline.

5. You are as good as the people you surround yourself with.

6. Short-term sacrifice is always required to achieve a long-term goal. It often means working when friends and family are celebrating a holiday, a birthday, a beautiful day or a Saturday night.

7. Time is your most precious resource- spend it thoughtfully.

8. Value the people who value you, do not take them for granted. Don’t waste time on people who don’t.

9. Your life will not go exactly as planned, and it will be for the better.

10. The sooner you are serious about financial planning, the more options you will have in the future.

11. The sooner you discover your calling in life, the happier you’ll be. It’s a worthy investment of your time to figure out what that is.

12. Get a dog.

13. Value experiences over possessions.

14. If in a difficult situation, ask yourself what a person you deeply admire would do.

15. Posting on social media is not activism. Volunteering your time to causes in need, donating money and writing to your local, state and federal representatives produce results. Put time and energy towards actions that create change.

16. Elections have consequences- be informed and vote. Not just every four years, but in local, state and midterm elections as well as presidential elections.

17. If certain circles of friends do not like you, it isn’t necessarily an indication that anything is wrong with you.

18. You intuition is informed by your experiences, trust it.

19. Take care of yourself- workout, eat well and get enough sleep. Your health is an extension of your self-image.

20. Learn to let go of things you know are bad for you: jobs, habits, friends, etc. They’re holding you back from a happier life.

21. Don’t ever let anyone make you feel like you don’t deserve something you’ve worked hard to earn.

22. When people insult you, especially behind your back, it says more about them than it says about you.

Read my Forbes blog. Follow me on Twitter.