Adam Fogelson, the chairman of Hollywood’s newest studio, listened to a pitch for a film called “Unmanned” with an encouraging smile. Hollywood pitches are jolly, elaborately courteous affairs. So on this sunny afternoon the filmmakers—two producers, the director, and the star, Keanu Reeves, whose black suit and black T-shirt and black beard gave him the look of a stylish sexton—had cheerfully trekked over the hill to STX Entertainment’s offices in Burbank, and STX’s executives had cheerfully welcomed them with a bottomless supply of bottled water. Chris Morgan, one of the producers, explained that “Unmanned,” an action film about a global war set in 2033, was really “ ‘Saving Private Ryan’ five minutes in the future.” Reeves would play Bellam, a discredited soldier who must go behind enemy lines in Hong Kong to rescue his younger brother, Royce. The film’s hook was that every soldier has an “ape”—a robot sidekick that accompanies him into battle and mimics his habits. To find Royce, Bellam would have to forge an unlikely bond with Royce’s ape. As in almost every Hollywood film about a dystopian future, humanity would outfox and outfeel the machines. Fogelson’s face was a mask of amenability. At forty-eight, he is neither young nor old, neither tall nor short, neither trendy nor mainstream. Pleasantly handsome and immensely competitive, he strives to remain imperturbable and, as he likes to say, “laser focussed.” Yet he’s a hugger, grateful for any true sincerity or passion in a town dedicated to fabricating both. Though he’d never volunteer this in a meeting, his strongest motivation is his fear of dying without leaving some monument behind. (As a boy, he burst into tears whenever he passed a cemetery.) His supporters admire his humor and his contradictions; his detractors find him arrogant. In a sense, he embodies the movie business he hopes to dominate: calculating, impulsive, hard-nosed, and hopeful. Morgan rolled a five-minute “sizzle reel,” essentially a trailer for an unmade film. Made by the prospective director, Tim Webber, who was the visual-effects supervisor on “Gravity” and “Avatar,” it comprised bits from twenty-three films, as well as from commercials for video games. Reeves’s voice-over—“War is pain . . . you hurt them, they hurt you”—created a mournful mood, and the editing was propulsive: shots of Royce’s ape flicking a lighter the way Royce did, intercut with battle scenes and closeups of Reeves and other actors looking weary and defiant. Pitch meetings, rife with sucking up and bogus fervor, are among Fogelson’s least favorite executive tasks. When the lights came on after the sizzle reel, he said, “I was thinking, Please, God, don’t let me have to fake enthusiasm—and that was the best version of that kind of thing I have ever seen! I love the wish fulfillment, the idea that, even after technology takes over, a human brain and a human soul still matter.” “This is about brothers,” Webber said. “It’s about people!” Reeves rubbed his palms as if starting a fire. Fogelson suspects that filmmakers will agree with any opinion he offers in order to get a green light, so he lets them describe the film they really intend to make, then trusts his gut about whether it sounds commercial. Choosing which movies to make is the crux of his job, the hundred-million-dollar decision. When he was eight, his father, the head of marketing at Columbia Pictures, told him, “You need a clear good guy and a clear bad guy, and the audience needs to know what it’s rooting for.” “Unmanned” satisfied that injunction. But one of Fogelson’s own rules is “Only make a film you already know how to sell.” Having come up as a marketer at Universal Pictures, which he ran from 2009 to 2013, Fogelson believes that seventy-five per cent of a movie’s success is due to its marketing and its marketability. One of his biggest bombs at Universal—a hundred-and-sixty-million-dollar bloodbath—was “47 Ronin,” which starred Reeves, regrettably, as a samurai warrior. Nonetheless, Fogelson believed he could sell Reeves here by positioning him as the kind of reluctant hero that he had played in “The Matrix.” “What do you think you can make it for?” Fogelson asked. The line producer answered, “We haven’t done an absolute budget. And for the battle portions we still have to find a preëxisting, slightly tropical Asian-feel locale that looks not exactly bombed-out. But . . . fifty, sixty?” Fogelson glanced at his No. 2, Oren Aviv, who narrowed his eyes. The script called for “the largest naval armada gathered since the Second World War,” among other showstoppers, which would run well above sixty million dollars. “Unmanned” was going to have to change to fit STX’s model—the origin story that explained to investors how the company would reinvent the Hollywood formula. The six major studios, besieged by entertainment options that don’t require people to get off the couch, have bet that the future lies in films that are too huge to ignore. Although they make low-budget films for targeted audiences (teen girls, say, or horror fans), they focus most of their energies on movies that cost more than three hundred million dollars to make and market. Such films are predicated not on the chancy appeal of individual actors but on “I.P.”—intellectual property, in the form of characters and stories that the audience already knows from books or comics or video games. These blockbusters are intended to appeal to everyone, everywhere—but they leave many people cold. STX’s founder and C.E.O., Bob Simonds, told me, “There’s a huge vacuum there. And that vacuum is the place you can tell human stories—what I think of as movies .” What had vanished were the kind of character-driven, John Hughes-level films that suck you in on a rainy Saturday morning. So STX was betting on the enduring appeal of movie stars. But they had to be playing the kinds of role that had made them stars. Russell Crowe in “Robin Hood”? Yes. Russell Crowe in “The Water Diviner”? No. And the movies had to be sensibly priced, by current standards: between twenty and eighty million dollars. STX’s internal data showed that such star-showcase films, within that budget range, were profitable thirty per cent more often than the average Hollywood film. So the studio planned to make a lot of them. By 2017, STX expects to release between twelve and fifteen movies a year, as many as some of the major studios. [cartoon id="a19459"] Though the studio presents itself as the shiny new disrupter, with a lean org chart and business cards printed in English and Mandarin, it’s fuelled by an ancient motivation: proving the other guys wrong. Bob Simonds is a shrewd, preppy fireball who dated Jennifer Beals at Yale, graduated summa cum laude, then made his name as the producer of such Adam Sandler comedies as “Happy Gilmore” and “The Waterboy.” He was offered two studio chairmanships but never a job running the parent company. “Studio chairman sounds so much bigger than it is,” Simonds said. “Somebody gives you the keys to the car—but you can’t fucking take it off-roading.” In the fall of 2014, he handed his own keys to Adam Fogelson, who also has something to prove: he had left Universal, the year before, because he was fired, and he felt that his ouster was unfair. Simonds told me—as Fogelson sat nearby, frowning responsibly but not demurring—that “Adam led that studio to the three most profitable years in its history, and he’s still suffering from watching the success built on his back.” In 2015, Universal accounted for a whopping twenty-two per cent of the industry’s domestic box-office, largely from films that Fogelson green-lit. “Bob and Adam are the chip-on-the-shoulder guys,” one agent said. “Their brand is ‘We were right, and you should have listened.’ ” With Simonds’s checkbook, Fogelson was going to demonstrate that you could build a studio without theme parks and television networks to help you market your films, and without anything like the two or three thousand people most studios employ. He was going to pick the right films, spend less to make them, spend just as much to market them, and win back audiences who’d forsworn the moviegoing habit. He was going to save the industry. And he didn’t expect much thanks. “The studios all hate us, all six of them,” he told me. “They hate us because they don’t want to have to go to New York and explain to their bosses how we’re making fifteen movies a year with only seventy employees.” In the “Unmanned” meeting, Keanu Reeves suggested that they could build up a flashback scene where Royce visits his brother in the hospital after rescuing him in a firefight. “I’m on morphine, I’m fucked up, he should have let me die, maybe he gives me a little fucking Teddy bear, because our relationship has that thing”—he banged his fists together. He stood and began to pace, talking the story through. He became Bellam, tagging along behind Royce’s ape in Hong Kong, limping, heroic, then became Royce’s ape, looking back coldly: “C’mon, keep up!” Fogelson and Aviv smiled at each other. Reeves was into the project, not just the paycheck. “And from a worldwide marketing perspective,” Chris Morgan concluded, “the two sides that are fighting are sort of Axis and Allies, but it’s not specified who the Axis are, so any country with a movie theatre can be on the side of the Allies.” Fogelson said, “I love—I hate—but I love the idea of the U.S. and China as partners in the next world war!” The Chinese market is the world’s second-largest, and growing more than fifty per cent a year. So the meeting ended in hugs and high hopes. “That was an awesome reel!” Fogelson said in the hallway afterward, high-fiving with Aviv. “This never happens, where we want to get it done today!” Aviv said. “Usually, it ends with ‘Fucking great—we’ll call you!’—and then that’s it.”

Adam Fogelson’s childhood dream, along with playing on the P.G.A. Tour, was to be a studio chief. It’s a sweet deal. You get paid eight million to upward of fifteen million dollars a year to decide what the entire world will clamor to see in two years. You are not a household name, but you determine who the household names will be. When Fogelson joined STX, he took a salary a quarter the size of his compensation at Universal—but he also received equity that, in success, will be worth many times that. And he got the chance to reinvent at least a system, and possibly himself. As he began the job, his daughter Willa reminded him, “The good part about being fired is you got to chase after a different dream. Just like a movie.” The downside to being a studio chief is that everyone hates and fears you, because you say no so much more often than yes—and because your yeses come with so many provisos. Also, you rarely get to hold the crystal ball long. Conglomerates prefer firing a studio’s leader for picking the wrong films to reassessing the whole business. Fogelson has an opportune temperament for the job, because he firmly believes that the world will love what he loves, once he gets its attention. Stacey Snider, the co-chairman of Twentieth Century Fox, told me that, when she worked with him at Universal, “if the tracking said we open a movie at ten to twenty”—million dollars—“I’m thinking ten, and Adam is thinking twenty. I used to say to him, ‘I don’t believe you’re Jewish, because you’re too optimistic.’ ” Yet his optimism is tempered by distrust of anything highbrow or oversubtle. The producer and record mogul Russell Simmons said, “Adam’s not interested in movies where they all talk too much, that Sundance shit of jerking off on the screen.” Fogelson’s favorite films include “One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest” and “Kramer vs. Kramer,” but also “National Lampoon’s Animal House” and “National Lampoon’s Vacation.” At most studios, prospective films are vetted by a green-light committee. Marketing and distribution weigh in on whether they can sell and disseminate the film, and then, after totting up expected costs and examining “comps”—the receipts of comparable films—the executives build a spreadsheet showing a range of outcomes. Then the chairman decides whether the film seems likely to help the studio hit the target margin (fifteen per cent, say) that its parent company set for the year. Fogelson looks at comps, too, but then he applies a three-part test. First, can the film be great? (By “great,” he means “distinguished within its genre.” When he green-lit “The Boy,” a horror film that STX will release this month, he hoped merely that it could be “a great blend of two beloved subgenres of horror: the spooky doll, and the house haunted by a fucked-up child.”) Then, Do we know how to sell it? And, Can we make much more in success than we lose in failure? [cartoon id="a19711"] Modest profit doesn’t suffice. STX is now filming “The Foreigner,” which stars Jackie Chan as a former assassin who comes out of retirement to hunt the I.R.A. terrorists who blew up his daughter. Fogelson was confident that he could sell it, and that it was a “free play”—that it would earn enough in China alone to recoup its costs. The low-risk strategy would be to bring in a pliable unknown to direct. “We could have got a three-hundred-thousand-dollar director,” he said. “But we worked hard to get a Martin Campbell to give it a chance to be great.” Campbell, the director of “Casino Royale” and “GoldenEye,” got paid about two million dollars, which means that STX spent an extra $1.7 million to play the greatness lottery. However, Fogelson noted, “If you ask, ‘Can we make something great once or twice a year that violates a rational business model?,’ the answer is no! It’s not a painting—it’s tens and tens of millions of dollars. Also, none of our movies are being made with the idea that they have to turn out great. Because eighty per cent of movies don’t.” When I mentioned a number of superb films that failed at the box office, and asked whether better marketing could have saved them, Fogelson said he wouldn’t have made them in the first place. He’d have scotched “Blade Runner,” because “darkness and sci-fi is really hard”; “Fight Club,” because “watching people beat the shit out of each other is a tough ask”; and “The Shawshank Redemption,” much as he loved it, because the obvious sell—an innocent man trying to escape from prison—was a huge spoiler. Fogelson is well suited to an age in which studios spend less making films than they do marketing them around the world—and in which films and their marketing are increasingly synonymous. After Fox rejected Seth MacFarlane’s idea for a film about a foulmouthed Teddy bear, Fogelson made it into a half-billion-dollar worldwide smash for Universal. “In early 2012,” he said, “if you asked a roomful of people ‘What’s “Ted”?,’ some might have said, ‘A conference,’ and some, ‘My uncle,’ and most would have no idea. Four months later, all around the world, a giant portion of people would have said, ‘A movie about a magical bear who comes to life.’ You’ve gone from a nonexistent concept to a distant cousin of Coca-Cola in four months. That is an exciting, terrifying, magical truth.” The terrifying part is how hard that success is to repeat: “Ted 2,” last summer, made less than half as much.

The history of the movie business is a soaring ascent followed by a long swoon. In 1927, when America had a third of its current population and movie tickets cost twenty-five cents, the studios enjoyed box-office revenues of seven hundred and eighty million dollars. That’s $10.6 billion in today’s money—nearly three hundred million dollars more than the studios took in in 2014. In those days, each studio owned its own theatres and distributed as many as two hundred films a year, knowing that people would show up for whatever was playing. Last year, the studios released only a hundred and seventy-eight films in total, and they had to carefully and expensively market each one—to people who stayed home anyway. The average teen-ager, the moviegoer of the future, sees six films a year in the theatre. Movie theatres are no longer where we go for stories about who we are. That’s become television’s job. We go to the movies now for the same reasons that Romans went to the Colosseum: to laugh, to scream, and to cheer. Comedy, horror, and triumphs of the human spirit still play better in theatres than at home. What plays best of all, of course, is a spaceship going kablooey all over the screen. Extravagant computer-generated imagery is the hallmark of blockbusters that are carefully formulated to avoid being “execution dependent” or “review sensitive”—to avoid needing to be good. One studio head told me, “Movies may not have gotten better over the years, but they’ve gotten more satisfying. A generation ago, execs made movies that they wanted to see. ‘Kramer vs. Kramer’ was a really good movie, but it’s not satisfying to a global audience. Whereas the ‘Harry Potter’ series and the ‘Lord of the Rings’ trilogy weren’t great movies, but they were very satisfying.” The director Billy Ray traced the phenomenon to the economic collapse of 2008, and to the decline of the DVD market. “That’s when corporate timidity gave way to terror,” he said. “Studio people actually said to me, ‘Don’t bring me anything that’s good, because I’ll be tempted to buy it, and I can’t.’ ” The studios’ turn to spectacle to transfix a restless audience is not new. When TV became popular, in the nineteen-fifties, the studios responded with such CinemaScope behemoths as “The Robe” and “Beneath the 12-Mile Reef.” (Billy Wilder suggested that the widescreen technology might be best suited for filming “the love story of two dachshunds.”) What is novel is the studios’ heavy reliance on the string of sequels known as a franchise. Shawn Levy, the director of the “Night at the Museum” series, said, “We have projects at six studios, and ninety per cent of their attention goes to the ones that are superhero or obviously franchisable. And every single first meeting I have on a movie, in the past two years, is not about the movie itself but about the franchise it would be starting.” Twenty-nine sequels and reboots came out last year, many of them further illuminations of a comic-book universe. One senior studio executive told me, “As a moviegoer, I don’t like seeing all these sequels and franchises. But we have to do justice by the shareholders, and from a marketing perspective it’s a lot easier: ‘Star Wars’—Gee, I wonder what that’s about?” Getting any movie right is hard, so why not make one that can bring in five hundred million dollars? The blockbuster game is a fantastic business to be in when it works, which is why conglomerates keep buying studios. But it’s getting steadily less fantastic, which is why conglomerates keep selling them. A studio head told me, “The hundred-million-dollar Roland Emmerich movie that does five hundred million worldwide—every year, our profit on it goes down.” Making less and less of a product with declining margins is probably not a recipe for long-term success. And competition is everywhere. One longtime film executive predicted, “With Google, Verizon, A. T. & T., Comcast, Hulu, YouTube, Facebook, Amazon, and Netflix getting into original content, studios won’t be able to compete with digital distribution. Within three years, Paramount won’t be in existence, Sony will disappear, Fox will buy Warner Bros., and you’ll have Fox, Disney, and Universal left.” Yet the studio executives I spoke with don’t seem to fear being supplanted. One noted coolly, “Despite its current volatility, this is the most stable business in the history of the United States. The six studios that are here today have been here since the beginning, early in the last century. That’s a function of some serious impediments to getting into the business.” Hollywood has proved so resistant to disruption because relationships with talent, a feel for disparate audience segments, and a knack for providing global satisfaction aren’t things that a startup can easily replicate. [cartoon id="a19663"] The bygone aspirants include Orion and Hemdale and Artisan and Overture and Morgan Creek and Relativity Media and a dozen others. The producer Joe Roth started Revolution Studios in 2000 with a billion dollars in financing and a remarkably advantageous deal with Sony. “Our assignment was to fill out a third of Sony’s slate with mid-range movies,” Roth told me. “But the problem with living in the mid-range is you gotta have taste.” Revolution débuted with “Tomcats,” a conspicuous turkey, and later released the infamous “Gigli.” The studio died in 2007. “Frankly,” Roth said, “we didn’t make enough good movies.” And taste isn’t enough. “At Universal, Adam found breakout winners in the mid-budget category, and I’ll bet that he can find them for STX,” Fox’s Stacey Snider told me. “But the challenges STX faces are absolute. There are very few release dates when they won’t be facing the big behemoths from the studios. What makes movies uniquely cinematic is really compelling I.P.—and their movies won’t have that. And because STX’s movies won’t have big special effects, either, they’ll be domestic in their appeal, not global. If the domestic market is flat at best, and STX can’t afford to make movies that play in China, it’s, like, Wa, waaa ”—she made the sad-trombone sound. One leading agent told me, “I think STX is kidding itself with its business model, trying to disrupt the studios at the end of the studio age. Even if it can develop a franchise, I don’t know how it survives in the long term. The subtext of every conversation I have, nowadays, is the good old days.”

Every studio head is ceaselessly petitioned by filmmakers who appeal to his humanity, hoping he’ll be so inspired by their talent that he’ll bet the studio on it. The ones who listen don’t stick around long. In this climate, Adam Fogelson’s warmth and buried anger, his habit of taking deals personally, are unusual. “Adam has a soul,” Billy Ray said. “I wouldn’t say it’s singular in this industry, but it doesn’t take long to call roll.” Like most studios, STX doesn’t grant final cut to directors, or allow them to approve trailers and marketing materials, but Fogelson solicits their compliance. “It’s not making widgets,” he said. “Our widgets have thoughts and feelings and, in a perfect world, want to be widgetized by you again in the future.” Pete Berg, the director of “Friday Night Lights” and “Hancock,” is devoted to Fogelson, who loyally defended him after a film that he directed for Universal, “Battleship,” lost a hundred and fifteen million dollars. So, over a lunch of short-rib sandwiches at STX’s offices last spring, Berg offered Fogelson first dibs on an action film he hoped to produce, “Mile 22.” The film’s story was slender: a female C.I.A. agent (the mixed-martial-arts star Ronda Rousey) and an Indonesian cop (the Indonesian actor and fight choreographer Iko Uwais) race to the Jakarta airport to escape the country, battling bad guys the whole way. Berg, together with another producer and the film’s director, emphasized the action, which would be kinetic, brutal, and original—though they also reassured Fogelson that it would closely resemble what Uwais had done in “The Raid 2,” a bloody blur of serendipitous weaponry, including chairs, hammers, broom handles, and a griddle. Berg described it as “the new wave of combat cinema.” “Nice!” Fogelson said, warming to the marketing possibilities. The other producer said they’d found a good facilitator in Jakarta, who’d supervised scenes in the Michael Mann thriller “Blackhat”—a spectacular dud. “We called all the people who worked with him—” Fogelson pounced: “And apologized?” Berg added, “On behalf of all of America?” Fogelson cracked up. Then he said, “We’ve got to talk about Silva”—the third lead role. “And if it’s not Bradley Cooper or Brad Pitt . . .” Everyone laughed. Silva, described in the screenplay as “a salty intelligence hack who’s shoveled shit on four continents,” wasn’t a superstar’s role. And, in any case, the budget wouldn’t accommodate a superstar; because Fogelson had released successful microbudget films at Universal, STX had begun considering less expensive projects, and this one was budgeted at just ten million dollars. Yet Fogelson’s goal was to cast a star, or at least a legitimate name. “That tells the audience this is a film, not a vanity exercise,” he told me. “If Liev Schreiber wanted to do it, we’d talk about the film in one way, the ten-million-dollar version, and if Dwayne Johnson or Mark Wahlberg wanted to do it we’d talk about it in another—the fifteen-to-eighteen-million version.” With studied casualness, Berg remarked, “There’s a Will Smith play for Silva—he’s a huge U.F.C. fan. It would be sick!” “Totally sick!” Fogelson agreed. They both leaned back, imagining it. Then Berg broached the key point: “What would you pay Will Smith?” “Two million dollars a week,” Fogelson said, instantly. “Most he’s ever gotten. A million a week is ‘Use me.’ Two million a week is ‘Wow, you really love me!’ ” Berg brightened. “I’m going to say, ‘Let me come to your house with Ronda and explain why you should do it.’ ” “Be heroic!” Fogelson suggested. With that problem solved, or at least deferred, he raised another one: Ronda Rousey’s acting chops. He asked, with no particular inflection, whether Berg had seen her cameo in “Furious 7.” “You’re concerned about her acting?” Berg said. Fogelson nodded emphatically. “I’m on that. I’m on that this afternoon ,” Berg said. Assessing Fogelson’s expression, he continued, “I’ll set a dinner, and you’ll see how charming and talented she is. She’s a lethal weapon—and she’s beautiful.” “Great!” Fogelson said. “Let’s make it lunch.” A homebody, he’d almost always rather be making dinner with his wife and two young girls. “Dinner’s better,” Berg said, with a crooked smile. “I’m excited for a lunch,” Fogelson said. Afterward, Berg explained, “I have a gym, and I train fighters. Rule No. 1 is ‘Don’t ever fall in love with your fighter.’ Rule No. 2 is ‘You always fall in love with your fighter.’ Adam’s job is to maintain a healthy distance—he might have to say no to us, or shut the movie down. My job is to make that impossible. So I want it to be dinner, to have it be intimate—to make him fall in love.” [cartoon id="a19697"]

The conventional wisdom in Hollywood is that “you get killed in the middle.” A fifty-million-dollar film costs more to make than a genre film, and nearly as much to market as a tentpole—and, being neither for a sharply defined group nor for everyone, it often can’t find a sufficient audience. “It’s such a weird thing to say, but sometimes it’s better to spend more than less,” Stacey Snider said. “Production values and star power are reasons for consumers to come to the theatre.” In 2014, the studios released seventy fewer star-showcase films than they did in 2005. Though such films are the ones that people tend to remember—“Michael Clayton,” “Argo,” “American Hustle,” “American Sniper”—each studio’s annual slate includes only one or two, as Oscar bait. But for decades star showcases were a Hollywood staple. In the eighties, Carolco, Miramax, and New Line all used the “B-movie stars doing what they do best” formula, as Disney did on such films as “Down and Out in Beverly Hills.” (Jeffrey Katzenberg, then at Disney, got Bette Midler to accept only six hundred thousand dollars for the film by reminding her agent that her career was “in the fucking toilet.”) The producer Lorenzo di Bonaventura told me that when he was an executive at Warner Bros., in the nineties, “We were making lots of ‘Batman’-scale movies, but Steven Seagal’s deal was the most profitable one we had, because his movies didn’t cost much, played in every foreign market, and did really well on TV.” As Bob Simonds considered creating a new studio, he was convinced that history was right and conventional wisdom wrong. In 2011, he sat down with Bill McGlashan, the managing partner of the private-equity firm TPG Growth, to discuss the opportunity. McGlashan, whose firm became STX’s largest shareholder, told me, “You’ve got a billion unsatisfied people in China and a billion more in India desperate for content!” They would sate the clamoring masses. Simonds commissioned a study of ten years’ worth of twenty-to-eighty-million-dollar films featuring a star in a signature role. Such films proved to have an average profit margin of twenty-four per cent—roughly double the average studio return. Confirmed in his own experience, Simonds laid the groundwork for STX Entertainment (“S” for Simonds, “T” for TPG Growth, and “X” for secret project). To call yourself a studio, you basically need to do three things: finance movies, distribute them, and market them. Studios have distribution deals that insure that their big releases can play on at least three thousand movie screens. So Simonds negotiated deals with the four leading theatre chains. It took a year, but he made sure that STX’s biggest releases could open on three thousand screens—and he got a revenue share equal to that of the major studios. His leverage was exhibitors’ desperation for a wider range of movies. Gerry Lopez, who was then the head of AMC Entertainment, America’s second-largest chain, explained that he made the deal with STX because “we need more movies. The studios are in the sixteen-week-a-year business, so they worry about sixteen Fridays. I worry about fifty-two Fridays. And STX will bring back a broader audience for the brainier, more intricate movies—not just the twenty-one-year-old who’s there for the explosions.” For a new studio, a war chest is crucial, because costs mount hugely while income trickles in. Studios lose money showing films in theatres, because of the marketing costs; they make as much as seventy-five per cent of their revenues later, with home video and sales to television. Ideally, you need $1.5 billion in funding, which allows for fifty bombs in a row (though you’d lose credibility long before that). Simonds sought funding in China—as all Hollywood has begun to do. It’s home to both the money and the audience. In 1980, the international market contributed less than a quarter of studios’ box-office revenues; by 2018, the Chinese market alone should exceed the North American market. And Simonds was an old China hand: the scion of an Arizona water-rights fortune, he once attempted to take over the Chinese water industry. He secured the Chinese private-equity fund Hony Capital as his third-largest shareholder—Simonds himself is the second-largest—and used that coup to help amass $2.5 billion in cash and credit lines. Last April, an investment banker named Donald Tang arranged for thirty Chinese entrepreneurs to visit Fox, Sony, and STX. They toured Hollywood in the way that one might tour Detroit—as a cautionary ruin. Tang explained, “Your relationship with content will very soon be more important than your relationship with other members of society. As much as the Chinese would like to tell the best stories in the world, everybody knows Hollywood is still the king of content—but with a backward, broken process.” After the tour, Huayi Brothers, a Chinese film conglomerate, invested in STX’s entire slate, putting up a quarter of the studio’s production costs. Tang said, “They saw how enthusiastic STX’s employees were, and that they were willing to take less in compensation for much more in incentives. They didn’t see that at the traditional studios.” The Chinese backing came with a new set of expectations. Simonds had considered buying a library of old films, a standard startup strategy for providing a revenue stream to cover the films that fail. Lionsgate, the only studio in recent years to make a real run at the majors, began by buying libraries, and its backlist now brings in five hundred million dollars a year. “I thought Miramax was the best library out there,” Simonds told me, “and buying it was a layup.” It was for sale for a billion dollars, and he believed he could secure it for about half that. “I was shut down not only by my board—which said, ‘What the fuck are you doing?’—but by people in Hong Kong, who told me it would be a terrible acquisition because it confuses our story.” Libraries were yesterday; STX was supposed to be tomorrow. So, to begin, Simonds had to rely on Adam Fogelson, and his mastery of the third realm of a studio’s domain: marketing.

Fogelson knows early in development what the sell of a movie is, and he shapes the film accordingly. He’s an optician, swapping out the lenses in his refractor and inquiring, “Clearer now? Or now?,” until the image is crisp. When STX was negotiating with the owners of UglyDoll, a line of mischievous, misshapen plush dolls, for the rights to make an animated movie, Fogelson told his staff that he could already see the tagline over “a cute-looking version of that one-eyed character: ‘Beauty is in the eye of the beholder.’ How do you not want to see that? There are so many good and easy ways to make you care about creatures who know they’re not attractive.” As a boy in Hidden Hills, in the San Fernando Valley, Fogelson seemed immune to this kind of self-doubt: omnicompetent at playing soccer, hitting a golf ball, cooking duck à l’orange. In high school, he was the president of his class, then of the student body. His father, Andrew, recalled, “Somebody told me, ‘He truly is a magic boy!’ Had Adam heard that, it would have shocked him. He was convinced that he sucked and that he would always suck. Forty years later, I still think he sees himself as a little outside the normal human flow.” Fogelson’s mother, Susan, nicknamed him Raskolnikov. [cartoon id="a19662"] Because Andrew Fogelson ran marketing at Columbia, and later at Warner Bros. and United Artists, his son learned to see movies as a construct. “The first time I spent real time with my father on a set, on an unmemorable horror film called ‘The New Kids,’ I watched them lay tracks for the camera to dolly on—and then I later saw the dailies of that scene,” he recalled. “From that day forward, some piece of me has never watched a movie without thinking about where the tracks are.” In college, at Stanford, he adopted a deeper and more authoritative voice to broadcast basketball and baseball games. He considered a career in sportscasting, but shrank from so much travel. After graduating, he tried writing screenplays, including a “Big Chill”-style reunion movie about quarter-lifers called “Rounding First.” The trailer moments came easily, but he found that his interstitial material—characters and dialogue and so forth—was, essentially, “shit.” So he took marketing jobs at Trimark Pictures and then, in 1998, at Universal. He was determined to keep a certain emotional distance: “I saw my dad get fired numerous times, and I vowed I’d never let the job define me.” At Universal, Fogelson became known for homing in on a film’s most salable element. It was he who advocated the poster for “American Pie,” with its suggestive photo of an all-American boy and a pie with a hole in it. “A lot of people in marketing tests were turned off by the guy screwing the pie,” he acknowledged. “But the water-cooler conversation about it was valuable.” An eleven-million-dollar teen film became a four-picture franchise. Universal, one of the smallest of the major studios, was struggling, but Fogelson prospered. He became president of marketing and distribution, and then, in 2009, the studio’s chairman. The night of the announcement, he and his wife, Hillary, attended the première of a Universal comedy, “Couples Retreat.” “After the screening,” he said, “I remember looking up and seeing a line of people coming over to say hello. It looked five miles long.” Hillary Fogelson said, “It was like you were the new mob boss, and they all wanted to kiss the ring. Most of it felt very insincere.” “It wasn’t insincere,” Fogelson said. “It was a practical reality.” A week later, Fogelson had to introduce himself to executives from Comcast, which was about to buy NBCUniversal from General Electric. They would be the fifth owners he’d worked under in eleven years. “Adam inherited a damaged company,” one of his colleagues said. Universal was last among the six studios, with an 8.5-per-cent share of the box office. “And the new owner, Comcast, was skeptical of the film business.” Given a mandate to build franchises, Fogelson was immediately stuck with “Battleship,” based on the Hasbro game. The project was troubled, and it would have cost the studio thirty million dollars if he shut it down. Instead, he decided that Universal had a chance to lose less if he not only made the film but added spectacular visual effects. The budget, first pegged at a hundred and fifty million dollars, ended up three years later at two hundred and nine million—for a noisy, cluttered bomb. Another would-be franchise extravaganza, “Cowboys & Aliens,” also failed to interest anyone in seeing a sequel. Given his slow start, Fogelson’s demeanor grated on some. “His tone and confidence came across, to the Comcast guys, as cocky,” one Universal exec said. And his inexperience with the protocols of production showed. Fogelson’s friend Scott Stuber, a producer at the studio, said, “I’m sure there were times when Adam didn’t express ‘We can’t make your movie’ as tactfully as he might have.” At the end of 2011, Fogelson told his team that he was no longer going to make big-budget, non-sequel, non-I.P. films. Instead, he made expensive sequels—another “Bourne” film and another “Fast and Furious”—and lots of mid-budget films. “There was a concern there that that was too conservative,” Fogelson told me. It wasn’t. He approved fifty-three films at Universal; of them, thirty-nine cost less than eighty million dollars, and they grossed $7.3 billion worldwide, for a return on investment of a hundred and fifty-three per cent. He was particularly proud of “Bridesmaids,” “Lone Survivor,” and “Pitch Perfect,” movies with heart that proved a lot of doubters wrong. Universal’s market share rose to third, and Comcast extended his contract a year ahead of schedule. Fogelson was making nearly ten million dollars a year, flying on the corporate jet, mixing with Barack Obama and Barbra Streisand. Still, when I saw him a few times during this period, he bore the glassy aspect of a man trying to convince himself that all is well. “Adam’s old office, in marketing, was a busy, happy toy shop,” Allison Shearmur, a former Universal executive, said. “The new one was empty and corporate. I think he was surprised at how little of his old self was relevant to that job.” In September of 2013, the C.E.O. of NBCUniversal flew to Los Angeles and, without much preamble, let Fogelson go; a Comcast exec would now supervise the studio. Hillary Fogelson said, “When Adam called to tell me the news, I absolutely thought he was fucking with me.” Moments before the meeting, Fogelson had called Steven Spielberg to green-light “Jurassic World,” which became the third-highest-grossing film of all time. Scott Stuber said, “The firing wasn’t about Adam. It was Comcast saying, ‘We’ve had enough time to analyze the division, and now we want to bring in our guy.’ ” Fogelson felt embarrassed and stung; he hadn’t been able to keep his emotional distance after all. He said, “Half the people at my daughters’ school work in the entertainment business, and they’re looking at you as ‘the guy who just got fired.’ ” He eventually decided that the real question wasn’t why he’d got fired but “ ‘How did I get that job in the first place?’ It requires spending a significant part of your day wondering ‘Who’s trying to kill me?’ and ‘Who do I need to kill?’ ” He suggested to Hillary that they move to Boise, Idaho, always highly ranked as a place to retire to, and he’d teach marketing at Boise State University. She told me, “I said, ‘You’d weigh six hundred pounds, because you’d just sit around and watch sports.’ What became clear, over time, was that Adam had unfinished business here—he wanted to prove that his idea about how to make and market films was right.” These days, when Fogelson shows visitors the view from his new office, atop the tallest building in Burbank, he points southwest and notes, “I can look right down on Universal.” [cartoon id="a19453"]

A few days after STX’s promising first date with Keanu Reeves and the “Unmanned” team, the filmmakers got back to the studio with a precise budget: it would cost just fifty-three million dollars to go steady. Oren Aviv gave Fogelson a blunt assessment: “Their budget is absurd.” STX’s head of physical production, Ross Fanger, calculated the true cost at twice that. He noted that geographic savings could be had: “We can shoot it in South Africa, which is ten to fifteen per cent cheaper than Budapest, which is thirty per cent cheaper than Vancouver, which is twenty per cent cheaper than L.A. Or Jakarta, which is astronomically cheaper than South Africa.” But STX didn’t necessarily want to become known as Indonesian outsourcers. Fogelson has a knack for making Realpolitik seem reassuring. “We are fully committed to your realizing your vision at a price point that acknowledges that this hasn’t been tried before” sounds supportive, where the same message shorn of ornament—“We’ll make your iffy project but only dirt cheap”—might rankle. He’s a master of the non-note note: “No one here is advocating this, but what about . . . ?” If the filmmaker resists, he’ll nod agreeably and say, “Totally understood, and wasn’t suggesting it.” Often, in the end, his note gets taken. With stars, sometimes the best management technique is delegation. When Reeves phoned STX to object to the bean counting, Aviv took the call as Fogelson looked on. “No, Keanu, we love it! We do love it,” Aviv insisted. “Believe me, we’re excited. Listen, I hear your frustration—but the idea here is to come down from the budget we have for the next version of the script, and then move ahead full speed.” He listened, nodding, then said, brightly, “And if it all works on our end you’re available to shoot in January, as we discussed?” He wagged his head playfully at Fogelson: “Well, there’s a chance you’re available then? Great!” After hanging up, Aviv explained, “Keanu is arguing that there’s no point in budgeting a script that’s not going to be the final script anyway, and that we’re losing all this momentum.” “So they’re acknowledging that the budget they gave us with great confidence in that meeting was a complete fantasy.” “Absolutely,” Aviv said. “It’s how the game is played.” Fogelson thought that over. “To be fair, if they had come to us at the beginning and said, ‘It’s an eighty-five-million-dollar film,’ we’d have said no.” “So they win!” Fogelson shook his head serenely: “We can always say no later.”

One July afternoon, Bob Simonds veered into Fogelson’s office and considered the stack of still unopened boxes from his Universal days. “Are your balls in there?” he asked, flinging his arm around Fogelson’s neck and mock-throttling him. He cackled, then picked up a putter and made a few passes with it as he rattled off questions about “The Foreigner,” the thriller that STX was making with Jackie Chan. It was crucial that it meet all the criteria for a Chinese co-production—which would qualify it for a much larger slice of theatrical revenues from China. One requirement is that a third of the lead cast be Chinese; Simonds had been chagrined to learn that Chan was from Hong Kong, which didn’t count. Fogelson said, “Totally fair questions, totally valid, and I’m sure we’ll be able to work it out.” And, indeed, because Chan is a huge star in China, the government’s film board decided to count him as Chinese. The Chinese market required constant attention. John Zhao, the founder of Hony Capital, told me, “STX’s films will incorporate Eastern elements, and then, if they’re a hit, we can roll out derivative products—television shows, user-driven content, and so on.” To get foreign films shown in China, however, you have to trim out anything remotely problematic: after an outcry in the local media, the makers of “Red Dawn,” a 2012 invasion thriller, digitally transformed its villains from Chinese into North Koreans. So last summer, when Fogelson heard a screenwriter’s pitch about an Italian-Chinese couple, he suggested that they switch the backstories of the couple’s parents: “What if the Chinese mom had passed away, and the Italian dad had divorced?” When the writer said, “Divorce is also a really big deal in the Catholic Church,” Fogelson gently replied, “But it doesn’t prevent a movie from being made.” Later that week, Fogelson drove his Tesla to Beverly Hills to meet Jackie Chan in his suite at the Montage Hotel to discuss “The Foreigner.” Noting the brutality of the story, Chan said, “We need a happy ending. Otherwise the audience leaves, and—” He stood and shuffled off, shoulders bowed. “Otherwise, it’s not sufficient reward for the journey you’ve asked the audience to go on,” Fogelson agreed. Chan then suggested that a female character who got killed off in the script be kept alive. “We save her for No. 2,” Chan said. “Now the I.R.A. goes after her —and that’s the story.” Fogelson grinned and shook the actor’s hand. Chan was just the kind of brand-extension expert that Fogelson needed to crack the Chinese market—and to attract wayward American viewers. Television has posed what might be called the “Game of Thrones” problem: once cinematic sex and violence, complete with dragons, are available on your phone, why pay a sitter and drive to a mall to see them? Even as the studios seek to distinguish their franchises from television, they have begun to shape them according to television’s dictates. A sequel like last May’s “Avengers: Age of Ultron,” from Marvel, is less a self-contained film than a loose amalgam of ongoing stories. The film lays track for two future sequels and allots significant screen time to each of the film’s fourteen main characters so they can serve as calendar reminders of forthcoming spinoffs and other ancillary products, including, of course, TV shows. The film is essentially a two-hundred-and-fifty-million-dollar episode of a television drama that airs every few years. To Fogelson, this Scheherazade sensibility makes both financial and creative sense. Driving back to the office after meeting with Chan, he remarked, “A few years ago, thinking about the sequel that way would be characterized as a lazy, greedy bastardization of the creative process. If you said that now, you’d be telling the entire world that they’re wrong. Sequels have become a duty—a form of storytelling that, thanks to great television, audiences have grown accustomed to. You can aspire to create six two-hour movies that develop your concept across multiple resolutions—which makes movies easier to sell, and creates a more predictable business model. Half the films we’ll say yes to will have sequelable potential.”

As STX began to roll films off its production line, Fogelson used every technique he knew to give each one the shimmer of quality. “Unmanned” ’s budget remained vexingly high, so he ordered a rewrite that would preserve “some of the eye candy of a world war” but that would cost no more than eighty million dollars. Meanwhile, his team opened discussions with six Chinese firms about co-producing the film and sharing its costs. [cartoon id="a19451"] Fogelson’s goal was to make films that looked twice as expensive as they were, so he was usually careful to budget for enough spectacle to sell. For “The Free State of Jones,” a Civil War epic starring Matthew McConaughey, he added five hundred thousand dollars to provide more cameras and extras for the opening battle sequence, insuring “enough huge Civil War action to justify the more intimate movie that follows.” And he told Pete Berg early on that “Mile 22” should have a separate, two-million-dollar budget for two set pieces “with fistfights in cars as they fly around, to give it the look and feel of a much bigger movie.” The revenge drama “Secret in Their Eyes,” starring Julia Roberts and Nicole Kidman, exemplified the studio’s delicate balance of grandeur and thrift. Ross Fanger told me, “If a studio were making ‘Secret in Their Eyes’ six years ago, it would have paid the stars ten to fifteen million each, plus three million for an A-list director. We give them much less, with participation in the back end, and we shoot it in thirty-five days instead of fifty-five, saving another five million—so it ends up costing $19.4 million instead of fifty million.” But, when Fogelson saw a cut of the movie, he worried that he’d trimmed the shooting schedule too severely, curtailing airiness and scope. (In November, the film’s weak début proved him right.) STX kept budgets down by exploiting an anomaly in the economics of filmmaking: the bigger the studio, the more it pays its talent. “It’s as if Walmart were paying its venders a whole lot more than mom-and-pop shops do,” a studio C.F.O. told me. STX arranged to pay Jennifer Lopez in the range of five hundred thousand dollars to star in a comedy that Fogelson characterized as “a little bit ‘Working Girl’ and a little bit a bunch of great J. Lo movies from fifteen years ago,” and Will Ferrell roughly the same to star in a quirky, low-budget comedy about the pornographer Russ Meyer. They’d get much more if the films became hits. Squeezing budgets was easier than meeting the star-in-a-wheelhouse-role requirement. Pete Berg couldn’t persuade Will Smith to play Silva in “Mile 22,” so he found another way to be as heroic as Fogelson had asked. After volunteering to direct the film himself, he got his frequent collaborator Mark Wahlberg to take the role. Wahlberg told me that Berg won him over by situating the role in the annals of cinematic history: “We talked about this guy being like Marlon Brando in ‘Apocalypse Now,’ one of the great, great movie villains. But with a lot more screen time.” The script was “written up” for Wahlberg. In the original, Silva was a turncoat, who served as Ronda Rousey’s mentor before dying in the third act; in the new version, constructed with a potential franchise in mind, Silva was the star, a complex man with a shot at redemption. Not incidentally, these changes reduced Rousey’s role: same fighting, less emoting. Or, as Fogelson tactfully put it, having avoided both dinner and lunch with her, “It allows Ronda to do everything she can and should do without having to carry any undue acting weight.” The negotiations over Wahlberg’s contract were protracted—so much so that his agent, Ari Emanuel, sent Fogelson two tortoises, and Fogelson sent back a vat of molasses. In the end, STX paid Wahlberg three-quarters of his top quote, plus a sizable share of the profits. Partly as a result of that payment, the film’s budget tripled, to thirty-five million dollars. On the other hand, “Mile 22” became the kind of project that the studio was predicated on: a star showcase. Yet STX’s original model was under stress. In June, it had twenty-four projects in production or active development, and just six of them fit the star-showcase template—and some of those fit only if you were generous. For instance, Fogelson contended that Matthew McConaughey’s role in “The Free State of Jones” was absolutely the actor’s signature brand: “a character fighting injustice, as in ‘Dallas Buyers Club.’ ” He admitted, however, that McConaughey—before the uptick in his fortunes known as “the McConaissance”—had been typecast playing smooth-talking sharpies. “So some of it is brand extension,” he suggested, “some of it is making an educated bet on trajectory, and some of it is him being the face of a hugely successful Lincoln campaign.” To get projects under way, Fogelson had to keep squeezing the definition of a movie star. The producer Paul Brooks is developing a romantic comedy at STX called “The One That Got Away.” Brooks said, “We want to make the actors younger, make it more of a concept sell, which would mean we’re casting somewhere between a star and a recognizable face.” Fogelson’s gloss was that stardom is contingent on budget. “Emma Watson and Ansel Elgort in ‘The One That Got Away’ are stars for the audience you’re making the film for if it costs fifteen million,” he said. “Emma Stone and Zac Efron are stars in that film at thirty million. And Jennifer Lawrence and anyone, including me, can work at fifty million.” This idea—that content and cost define a star—was almost exactly the opposite of the model Bob Simonds had pitched to his investors.

The studio’s first release, “The Gift,” had its début last summer, and in the weeks beforehand Fogelson declared that it showcased the studio’s thesis and strengths. The film, written and directed by Joel Edgerton, was about a high-school loser named Gordo who returns years later to mess with his high-flying former tormentor, Simon, and his innocent wife, Robyn. As there were only three real roles, casting would be crucial. Edgerton, who played supporting roles in “The Great Gatsby” and “Zero Dark Thirty,” had the right, slightly menacing mien to play Gordo. Rebecca Hall, who appeared in the Johnny Depp film “Transcendence,” would make a sympathetic trophy wife. For the linchpin role of Simon, the onetime bully who had gone on to an executive career, Fogelson suggested Jason Bateman, best known as the beleaguered but caring family man on “Arrested Development.” The film’s co-producer and financier, Jason Blum, contended that Bateman was too associated with comedy, and worried that marketing wouldn’t be able to sell him as a bad guy. But, Fogelson said, “the question of being haunted by past mistakes is cleaner if you have Jason than if you have a Tom Hardy. Jason is the best version of us. He’s not even ‘lovable but dangerous.’ He’s the class president.” Major studios have pronounced marketing advantages; they have not only plenty of spectacle to sell but plenty of ways to sell it. “If you’re one of Universal’s ‘Symphony Projects,’ ” Neal Moritz, who produces the “Fast and Furious” films, said, “every tentacle of their empire is promoting you—at the theme parks, on ‘The Voice,’ in Comcast Cable advertising, in being trailered onto their other big movies.” [cartoon id="barsotti-2007-01-08"] With “The Gift,” Fogelson had no spectacle to sell—only the film’s premise. “The movie’s original title was ‘Weirdo,’ which sounds indie, so we changed that,” he said. He didn’t want people thinking the film was weird; he wanted them thinking it was creepy. “We did a campaign with fifty entertainment bloggers and reporters, doing a deep dive into their social-media past to figure out what they needed or wanted, then sending them personalized gifts, like a replacement mug for one they’d broken, all signed ‘Your friend, Gordo.’ A day later, a second box, containing a trailer for the movie, would arrive. That successfully got ‘creepy’ out there in the discussion.” In the end, “The Gift” cost just five million dollars to make and $27.5 million to market, so the studio would profit if it grossed twenty million dollars in North America. “If the movie does fifteen, it’s a bad outcome, and we lose three,” Fogelson said. “If it does forty, we make fifteen million. Am I willing to risk three million to make fifteen? Yes.” Together with Oren Aviv, Fogelson spent hours staring at a scheduling whiteboard, looking for the best weekend to open it. They finally decided on August 7th. It was late enough in the summer that audiences might have “spectacle fatigue.” And the chief competition would be “Fantastic Four,” which had poor word of mouth, and “Mission Impossible: Rogue Nation,” in its second week. A week before the début, STX spent more than three hundred thousand dollars on a première for seven hundred people in downtown Los Angeles. The tracking showed that the film would open at only seven million dollars, the lowest end of Fogelson’s hopes. But he seemed exhilarated to be on a red carpet again, with Escalades disgorging starlets and photographers clicking away. Earlier that day, trying to dispel launch-party jitters, Bob Simonds had told Fogelson, “I’m going to wear a honeybee outfit, with antenna, and just not explain it.” He showed up in a navy suit, and the two men hugged. Inside the theatre, Fogelson stood up front, his arms crossed protectively, to introduce the film. (Earlier, he’d joked that his pre-première routine would be to “shower, shave, and vomit.”) “Jason Blum is a friend who I worked with in my prior . . . job,” he said. There were knowing chuckles. “You can laugh, it’s O.K.” He praised the filmmakers, promised that this was “the first of what will be many, many, many premières for STX Entertainment,” and bolted offstage. The film played well, and by 11:30 p.m., at the party, Fogelson was in a cheerful frame of mind, drinking red wine and huddling with his daughters. Jason Bateman came over and threw an arm around him: “I owe a lot of this to you, my friend!” “You were so great—you’re why the movie works,” Fogelson said. “Who would think you could be so evil?” “Yeah, I give it room for a reverse, I guess,” Bateman said, a little mystified, unable to see himself, as Fogelson could, as an element. “The Gift” opened at nearly twelve million dollars, and went on to gross forty-four million. The film earned a “B” from Cinemascore, which surveys audience members, and a ninety-three-per-cent-positive rating from Rotten Tomatoes, which tracks critics’ responses—so it was perceived as both satisfying and actually good. Fogelson felt quietly vindicated. “For five million dollars,” he said, “Jason Bateman, Joel Edgerton, and Rebecca Hall are the most A-plus movie stars in the world.”

Bob Simonds was pleased by the success of “The Gift.” He was almost equally pleased by the failure of “Secret in Their Eyes.” “I’d rather have fifteen mediocre-performing movies than five big hits,” he told me recently. “We believe in tonnage, because this is a landgrab. We’re using stars and brands to cut through the fucking cat videos.” The more films, the more attention, and the more new divisions that mushroomed off them. In September, Simonds announced the first: a digital division, led by Kathy Savitt, who’d been the chief marketing officer at Yahoo. “The movie side is not a loss leader, exactly,” he said. “But it’s the flypaper for other activities. Great storytellers come to us for films, and we ultimately channel them into streaming, digital, television, games, virtual reality, the Chinese arena.” He had closed a slate deal with a major Chinese group that would cover a further twenty per cent of STX’s production costs, and nearly finalized another deal, with one of the country’s largest companies, to be its partner in a television-streaming venture. “In China, we’ll have the whole thing locked up,” Simonds said. Chinese businessmen trooping through STX’s offices became so common that one afternoon, as Fogelson watched Simonds give another tour, he said, “ ‘I love Chinese people.’ ” Then he said, “Movie, movie?”—checking whether his executives caught the reference to “I love black people.” The president of production, Cathy Schulman, cried, “ ‘Jerry Maguire’!” Simonds told me, “My job is to get us public on the Hong Kong exchange as fast as possible, at a 16 or 17x multiple on earnings.” He continued, “If I’ve got billions in capital, in a year I can buy a lot of Hollywood divisions. I don’t think anyone will want the Sony library, but Sony TV? Fuck, yeah! And I’d love to go after stuff like the Bond rights and build it out across our platforms, with licensing, records, branding, gaming.” Ideally, he calculated, “the movie division will end up being about twenty per cent of the business. We never wanted to be Universal, we wanted to be Comcast.” The goal was to look enough like a Hollywood studio to get a huge infusion of money from Chinese investors, then use the money to cherry-pick Hollywood’s assets en route to becoming a global conglomerate. The story Simonds originally told, about making old-fashioned, human-scale stories, had given rise to its own sequel, about ramifying digital exploitation. Aiming at being a studio, today, is like aiming at being a caterpillar. The end game is metamorphosis.