GIF

It’s a tough to get through to your representatives right now. Their offices are slammed and phones are ringing off the hook. How can you, the concerned citizen, get your message through? We talked to some staffers to find out.

The two senators from your state and the House representative from your district work for you. You can help them understand what issues matter to you, and why you would like them to vote yes or no on a certain bill that’s coming up.

Phone Calls Still Speak Loudest, but Email is the Next Best Thing

I’m in Pennsylvania, so I have one of the hardest-to-reach senators, Pat Toomey, representing me. Normally we’d tell you a phone call is the best way to register your opinion, but a lot of the time my calls just go to voicemail—and then the mailbox is full.

Advertisement

I did get through to a human being today, and I asked her what is the best way to get my message through. She said to send an email through the form on the senator’s website, since those messages go directly to the staffer in Washington who handles the relevant topic.

Emily Ellsworth, the former staffer who penned a famous series of tweets and a comprehensive guide explaining why you should call rather than write, agreed that sending an email—straight from the heart, not a form letter—is your next best bet. She pointed out another perk to using the website to send it: your contact information gets added to their system, which allows staffers to see that you are a constituent when you call. You’ll also likely be added to their mailing list, which helps you find out about town hall meetings and other opportunities to give input.

Try All the District Offices

If you still want to talk to a staffer, remember that your congressperson has more than one office. In addition to a big office in Washington, DC, they will have several offices across their state or district. The DC office will employ staffers for various topics, but the local offices are just a few people. They’re also less busy. You’re a constituent if you live anywhere in the state (for senators) or the district (for representatives), so feel free to call any of the offices to get your message through. Contact information for all of them is on the congressperson’s website.

Don’t Clog Up the Phones for People In Other States

While you’re calling, make sure you only call the people who actually represent you. If you want to give Paul Ryan a piece of your mind, for example, you shouldn’t call his offices unless you actually live in Wisconsin’s 1st Congressional District. His staffers aren’t going to really care about you unless you’re in his district.

Advertisement

But in the case of Ryan and others with special jobs, you do have another option. Anyone in the nation can give their opinion to the Speaker of the House through the form at speaker.gov. If you have an opinion about what a congressional committee should be doing, each committee usually has an office with a phone number; call that committee, rather than bugging its members’ offices.

Why do you have to target your calls appropriately? Just think of me trying to get through to Senator Toomey. His lines are jammed with people who think they can influence his vote, but my neighbors and I can’t get through. Also, Ellsworth says, “it makes them think groups are hiring people to call from out of state.”

If you really want to influence somebody but you aren’t their constituent, talk to people you know who live in the appropriate state or district. Get them to pick up the phones and call with their concerns. You can also donate your time and money to nationwide groups that serve a cause you care about; they’ll have contacts in those faraway states.

Finally, if you’re concerned about what somebody else’s representative is doing, call your rep and ask what they’re doing to stand up to that person and represent your interests.

Try the Fax Line, and Other Creative Ways to Get Your Message Through

Delivering a pizza with a message, like above, to a legislator’s office is dicey. There are strict rules about when the staff can accept a gift. Ellsworth tells me that her office usually accepted food and flowers, but I’ve also heard of staffers refusing a box of donuts because they wanted to err on the side of caution.

Advertisement

Social media is another avenue that’s less effective than you might think. Usually Facebook and Twitter accounts are run by different people than the staffers that tally calls and letters, so your message won’t necessarily get through (especially since it’s not easy to prove that you’re a constituent). It can still be a great way to spread a message among other citizens, but don’t count on the congressperson personally reading your tweets.

Faxes are another way to get your message through, but Ellsworth warns that in some offices, they just go to a digital inbox. That makes them no more attention-getting than an email. And if they have no return address, it’s impossible to tell whether the faxes are coming from a real constituent, making them easier to delete and slower to get to the relevant staffer since somebody has to sort them.

That said, a staffer for Senator Toomey (the most-faxed lawmaker) told me that they do, in fact, have a real live fax machine in their Pittsburgh office. So, expect this one to vary—and maybe don’t rely on it as your only means of communication.

Request a Meeting

Meeting a staffer in person is a great way to get your message through, but it has to be relevant and useful. “Have some kind of schtick besides ‘I want to come yell at you,’” Ellsworth says.

Advertisement

For example, if you have an opinion on health care, gather up a group of doctors who can talk about how the Affordable Care Act affects how they practice. “We would meet several times with a group like that,” Ellsworth says. Teachers, scientists, and anyone with expertise on a particular industry fall into this category. If you do bring a group, keep it small: Ellsworth recommends three to five people.

You have the greatest chance of getting the attention of the staff if you focus on a topic that the member of congress cares about. To figure out what those areas are, look at what bills they have sponsored (4USXUS is one way to track this) and what committees they’re on. Don’t forget to also subscribe to their newsletter or facebook page.

The Next Opportunity to Vote Is Sooner Than You Think

Voting is the ultimate way to communicate your political opinion. It seems like we just swore in a new batch of senators and representatives, but you’ll be able to vote again before you know it. While the President serves a four-year term, congress operates on a different schedule:

Senators serve a six-year term. One-third of them are up for re-election every two years. That means that in 2018, we have the chance to vote for (or against) 33 of them.

serve a six-year term. One-third of them are up for re-election every two years. That means that in 2018, we have the chance to vote for (or against) 33 of them. Representatives serve a two-year term. All of them are up for re-election in 2018.

This tool from 270 to Win shows which senators are up for re-election in 2018, and how likely they are to win. Don’t just wait for the November elections, either: each party holds a primary earlier in the year. It’s difficult to unseat an incumbent, so get started in those efforts early by reaching out to your local political parties to figure out how you can help.