You can glean a lot about a person from where they decide to go on holiday. Paris, for example, has long been synonymous with old romantics; Goa has a history of hippies; and the Costa-del-Sol has a well-documented association with on-the-run cons (hence its nickname, “Costa del Crime”).

However, a new travel concept could change the way we think about people and the places they go. In fact, it could mean we don’t think about the places at all.

Known as the “mystery trip”, the concept is simple: travellers hand over their cash to an online travel agent, which then creates a surprise holiday for them based on their interests. The traveller is then instructed to turn up at an airport, station or port, where they open an envelope that explains where they will be going and what they will be doing there.

You can glean a lot about a person from where they decide to go on holiday Credit: ALAMY

It’s a holiday for people who don’t like planning holidays.

Jubel is the latest company to jump on the mystery trip bandwagon and claims to offer “real adventure made easy”. The Californian start-up says its customers can decide how much or how little of their trip they want Jubel to plan.

Mystery trips are holidays for people who don't like planning holidays

“Your request can be as vague as ‘a completely blind journey somewhere in the world’, to something more specific, such as ‘a culturally rich Indonesian experience’,” claims Jubel’s website.

“But it’s entirely up to you. However, one thing is for certain: the more that is left unknown, the more rewarding and thrilling your experience will be.”

Jubel is not the first company to offer mystery holidays. Earlier this year, the Pennsylvanian startup, Pack Up + Go, launched a similar concept; its travel agents specialise in planning surprise weekend trips for domestic US travellers.

“Who says surprises are just for kids?” said Lillian Rafson, CEO, who describes Pack Up + Go as the “embodiment of open mindedness, spontaneity and excitement”.

So far the company has sent punters packing on dozens of themed holidays across the US, including gastronomic tours of Milwaukee, cycling trips in Vermont and road trips in Maine.

The cruise industry has also muscled in on the act. As Telegraph Travel reported recently, the Bolsover Cruise Club is now offering voyage into the unknown: passengers hopping aboard its new 16-night Secret Sailaway excursion will be told nothing about the cruise except for the departure date and location.

Customers will, however, have the chance to guess where they are going by deciphering a series of riddles.

“Travelling is not as adventurous as it once was,” said Michael Wilson, the managing director of Bolsover Cruise Club. “This is our attempt to bring back some of the adventure, albeit with all the comforts of a luxury cruise.”

The more that is left unknown, the more rewarding and thrilling your experience will be

Wilson may have a point - the golden age of discovery is now behind us - but are we really lacking the inspiration to plan our own holidays? Or are we just lacking the time?

Either way, mystery trips offer a unique proposition for modern travellers. The question is: will they take off?

A new cruise will take passengers on a voyage into the unknown Credit: AP/FOTOLIA

Barely a year after launching, Mistrip, an early pioneer of secret holidays, already appears to have folded. Daniel Fahey, a destination editor at Lonely Planet, went on an excursion with the company before it closed.

“It was a little rough around the edges, and there were a number of activities that I wouldn’t have picked myself, but it satisfied the sloth-like sensibilities I tend to amass on holiday as I didn’t have to find my hotel or drive a hire car,” he said.

Mystery trips offer a unique proposition for modern travellers. The question is: will they take off?

“It also took me out of my comfort zone by taking me to remote vineyard dinners and down the Douro on a yacht. Perhaps mystery holidays lean a little too much on their novelty factor, but I’d certainly try another if I was in need of a short trip and was happy for someone else to take the reins."