Others were less ecstatic. “Who is Spielberg to define religion for us?” asked New York magazine’s film critic Molly Haskell. (The author of a recent monograph on Mr. Spielberg, Ms. Haskell has grown more appreciative of the filmmaker if not the film.)

The Times critic Vincent Canby called the film “the best — the most elaborate — 1950s science fiction movie ever made” but, noting Mr. Spielberg’s attempt at “both scientific and theological importance,” added, “That might have been fascinating if I’d had a chance to understand it.”

Video

And writing in the Catholic journal Commonweal, the critic Colin L. Westerbeck Jr. saw “Close Encounters” as the epitome of New Age mysticism “made out of, and for, our touchy-feely culture — the culture of group therapy and group grope, of EST, TM, and (close) encounter therapy.”

However universal, “Close Encounters” was very much a generational statement. Roy’s faith in the extraterrestrials inspires him to drop out, grow a beard and rebel against an official culture of lies. His female counterpart, Jillian Guiler (Melinda Dillon), is already something of a hippie, a solitary artist living alone with her young son (Cary Guffey) on an isolated farm.

Julia Phillips, one of the movie’s producers, saw “Close Encounters” as something akin to “Easy Rider.” In her memoir “You’ll Never Eat Lunch in This Town Again,” she recounts the pitch she fancied herself delivering to Columbia’s head of production: “Anyone who has ever dropped acid and looked up at the sky for a while or smoked a joint and watched the Watergate hearings on TV is waiting for this movie.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In addition to touchy-feely mysticism and contact highs, “Close Encounters” articulated the post-Watergate mistrust of government. While the movie was in production, Mr. Spielberg told The Washington Post that he felt the American government was “sitting on an incredible compilation of information” regarding visitors from outer space. “In many ways, this movie is a cosmic Watergate,” he explained. “Hopefully people will experience something very much like a real U.F.O. experience.”

Most profoundly perhaps, “Close Encounters” (which was in production during Jimmy Carter’s 1976 presidential campaign) expressed a yearning to be born again — as a child. Roy longs to escape adult responsibility. The film raises legitimate fears of losing one’s job, home, family and, in a powerfully poignant sequence, even one’s sanity. Yet the more Roy surrenders to extraterrestrial influence, the more infantile he becomes.

As the movie reaches its climax, other adults — many of them scientists — are shown acting like children. Science itself is downgraded, as when the appearance of the extraterrestrials prompts one scientist to inform his colleagues, “It’s the first day of school, fellas,” or when another suggests that Albert Einstein might have been an alien.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Spielberg is a master of popular culture whose forbears include Alfred Hitchcock (the arch-manipulator) and Walt Disney (the apostle of childhood innocence, but no less manipulative for all that). If “Jaws” was Mr. Spielberg’s Hitchcock film, “Close Encounters” channeled Disney. Interviewed by Rolling Stone at the time of the movie’s release, Mr. Spielberg credited “When You Wish Upon a Star” as his inspiration, citing “the feeling the song gave me when I was a kid listening to it,” presumably as the theme to the “Disneyland” TV show.

A baby boomer like Mr. Spielberg, I too watched “Disneyland” as a child (and remember the excited feeling that in watching it I was in a mind-meld with every kid in America). My first experience of “Close Encounters” came several months into its opening run, waiting in line at the neighborhood movie-house on East 86th Street in Manhattan. As memorable as the movie itself was the spectacle of patrons exiting the theater. Many appeared to be in tears.

“Close Encounters” would not have the same effect on me, but it did teach me something about the power of the film medium. The climactic light show is a drama of cinematic communication (and communion) in which nothing (and everything) is communicated — at least on the big screen. I cannot imagine a comparable “Close Encounters” seen on a laptop.