CZ Casey Zerafa me and while still running around after 3 children, I need to take some pride in myself & feel that I'm at equal value. Look good, feel good. " ..." more "I'm 37 and have never worn primer, concealer, foundation, powder or even eyeshadow. Only mascara. Now age has hit

KK K. K. Care," it's really good. I think that healthy and clean skin is key in any and every way. For example: makeup, confidence, beauty, etc." ..." more "I appreciated that it was specific and has a lot of information. I do recommend that you look up "Korean Skin

AY Amber Yancy apply it but this made it easy to understand. Thanks!" ..." more "This helped me a lot because I have never had to put on contour and highlight. So, I really did not know how to

SF Sarah Fields helpful too. Thanks. " ..." more "I have always had problems with hair, teeth, and makeup. I have used wikiHow to get my spilts, and this been so Rated this article:

GT Georgia Thomson enthusiastic friends! Thanks!" ..." more "I'm just about to start putting on makeup and I'm utterly confused. This explained it much more than my Rated this article:

DD Deeborah Efua Dotse up. " ..." more "I now know how to apply my makeup well. Before I used to do it in my own way but now I am more than perfect. Thumbs

AD Ashley Dempster "This article helped me look stunning! When I went to prom, I was surprised to see that I had won prom queen. " Rated this article:

PB Prinilla Beky "I am really impressed. I have learned a lot of new techniques I will be using to enhance my beauty."

DG Diamond Goxfir "I love everything on this, because I'm out of makeup like every day, so this really helps."

NJ Norma Johnson "I haven't used makeup in a very long time. Just wanted to see how to apply it properly." Rated this article:

VT Vandna Tilkaan "I don't apply make up and was looking for some tips. Found this article really useful. "

AC Akau Cinder "It will help to look more beautiful so that my husband will like me more than anyone."

FS Fernanda Sauceda "I showed my mom how to do it. When she was done, she was looking so cute and pretty." Rated this article:

RH Ronda Hunt "I am just starting to use makeup, and this is giving me tips on how to do it right."

VS Vishwambhara Singh "I usually wonder how to get a perfect makeup covered face, and I got the answer." Rated this article:

PC Phoebe Culliford "It's really basic and tells you what you need to do and what to get." Rated this article:

E Effanny "It helped me a lot, because I'm the type who doesn't wear makeup."

Sandra Brashier "I really did not know my colors and this explained it, thank you!"

KP Kyia P. "It helped me to see where I was going wrong in my makeup.Thanks!!"

MS Mily Sirus "She explained in detail and with a video for each step, so cool!" Rated this article:

TM Thando Makhathini "The steps helped, now I am more confident with applying makeup."

KW Kimberly Wright "Just basically helped me with how to properly apply my makeup."

M Monaliza "I really liked your makeup tips and your makeup step by step!"

AR Angie Rodriguez "Great tutorial. Simple and to the point. Enjoyed the clips."

YM Yolanda Mkhwanazi "It helped me a lot. Very detailed and simple to understand." Rated this article:

SS Sara Sharafat "How to apply lipstick is the best part; I love lipsticks."

KS Kimberly Stars "This article really helped me a lot. Thanks, wikiHow."

AC Alloisah Compo "I learned some steps how to put makeup on my face."

KM Kgomotso Malamela "This helped with the way I have to handle makeup."