“But I’m going to wake up with a headache,” he said, “and I don’t want that.”

Mr. Choffel, a hairstylist whose clients include Sharon Stone, Fergie and numerous fashion models, was seated in his salon. There was nothing stopping him from going to a club. But here he was, thinking about what was missing from his life.

“When you’re 27, there’s no tomorrow,” Mr. Choffel said. “At 42, today’s tomorrow. Going home to kids and a family, you’re creating something. You’re building something.”

He is not alone in his increasing distaste for a life that many married men would say they envy. With the freedom has come certain costs: isolation, regret and the feeling that, although you may still feel 25 in your heart, your knees are starting to ache and the years are slipping by fast.

Photo

“Are you single?” the Manhattan-based matchmaker Maria Avgitidis asked a reporter mid-interview, plunging him into a dark place. “And you are 40? Do you ever feel like all the really good girls that you would want to marry are taken?”

Full disclosure: My answer to each of Ms. Avgitidis’s questions was “yes.”

“That is where that panic comes from,” she said. “Like: ‘Why not me? What does he have?’ And then you realize that he is four years younger. And that is exactly where that panic comes from.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

‘The Old Guy in the Club’

That stomach-churning fear was perhaps best expressed by the comedian Chris Rock in his 1996 special “Bring the Pain”: “Every man has to settle down eventually. You know why you gotta settle down eventually. Because you don’t want to be the old guy in the club. You know what I’m talking about. Every club you go into, there’s always some old guy. He ain’t really old — just a little too old to be in the club.”

It’s hard to find someone who wants to be that guy. Although few single men are willing to admit to a sense of panic, they know there is always the chance of waking up one morning in a cold sweat.

Friends will tell you not to worry. They will cite Tinder and the other magical dating apps hidden in your phone while arguing that you are only a swipe away from sudden cocktails and possibly more.

But the single men in their 30s and 40s whom I spoke with — gay and straight alike — seemed very much aware that their options were narrowing. While they are not dealing with a reproductive deadline, they had the feeling that the party was nearing its end.

“People think that if you are gay and you are single, particularly in the city, that there is this sort of unbridled freedom,” said Ryan Wallace, a 35-year-old who works in corporate communications for a Fortune 200 company. “That you’re at the gym, you’re at the office, you’re at happy hour, and it’s just a constant on-the-go lifestyle. That may be true for part of your life, in your 20s. Gender identities aside, as everyone gets older, your priorities change.”

There may be perfectly good reasons that some men who went to college during the Clinton presidency have held on to singledom. Aside from taking pleasure in the feeling of moving untethered through the years, they may have wanted to make sure their careers were on track before starting a family during a rocky economic period.

Photo

But what if the moment you finally feel financially secure comes too late? And what if focusing on building a solid career is a pretext for avoiding the big stuff?

“I’m still at work,” said Jonathan Lee, an internal auditor at an international bank who lives on the Upper East Side. “That says a lot.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It was nearly 8 p.m. Mr. Lee said things had been hectic lately, with his work hours reaching close to 60 a week.

“It’s not healthy,” he said. “And I do have a sense of regret. I’m definitely underdeveloped, in terms of dating and relationships, and these are things that take skill and know-how you only get through experience. I just turned 40. Thinking about the math, the longer I wait to start my own family, you start to think, ‘When I consider someone to marry, I have to find someone young enough to have children. And the age difference. What’s acceptable? What’s O.K.? What doesn’t work?’ There are a lot more challenges the older you get, and I realize that now.”

Mr. Lee and Mr. Choffel, the hairstylist, share little in the way of experience and worldview.

While Mr. Choffel partied his way through his 20s as he climbed toward the peak of his profession, Mr. Lee, who described himself as a devout Christian, tended his career and avoided the weeknight bar scene. Yet both aspire to fatherhood, even as they worry that it may be getting late.

The same holds true for Scott Slattery, a 35-year-old communications and marketing consultant in Manhattan.

Asked if the recent deluge of weddings among those who have taken advantage of the legality of same-sex marriage in New York since 2011 has left him feeling pressed to find the right man, Mr. Slattery said, “I think the pressure is more an age issue than anything like a gay issue.”

In other words, he doesn’t want to be far removed from his youth when he becomes a father.

“I would like to be a parent,” Mr. Slattery said. “Luckily, I don’t have to have the kid. But I still want to take care of them through their entire lives, so I don’t want to be old.”

Photo

It seems that no single man can make it through his 30s without feeling a pang of regret for the life he could be having, even if it conflicts with his desire to do exactly what he wants all day long.

In the Netflix series “Master of None,” the single protagonist, Dev Shah, played by Aziz Ansari, sometimes feels envious of his married friends, even as he fights the desire to settle down.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I used to be terrified of having kids (and I still am to some extent),” Alan Yang, who created the show with Mr. Ansari, wrote in an email. “My sister had a baby a couple of years ago, and the completely adorable nature of my niece has slowly started to change my mind. But it’s still unbelievably scary. You’re going from someone who is completely self-centered to someone for whom there’s something more important than yourself and your own dumb everyday wants.”

Paul Gollash, the 40-year-old chief executive of VOXY, an educational tech company for those who want to learn English, decided to become proactive about dating in his late 30s, after realizing he was fed up with being single.

He started dragging himself to gatherings that he would have avoided at another time in his life: art exhibits, cocktail parties and work events where he might meet new people.

One rainy Saturday in 2014, after having woken up still exhausted from the night before, he pulled himself out of bed for a wine and cheese party held by friends of friends in Park Slope.

Once there, among the married couples, he spotted a woman named Maria Cabo whom he had met briefly once before. With the party winding down, Mr. Gollash worked up his courage and walked across the room, where she was seated with other women, all of them speaking Spanish. Not long after, while texting with her, he asked if she would like their first date to be in the Canary Islands, where he was scheduled to give a talk. Ms. Cabo replied with a photo of a swimsuit with a passport.

They were married last May and are now the parents of a baby girl, Greta.

“One of the ironies or lousy parts of getting older is that you do have less energy,” Mr. Gollash said from a hotel suite in Madrid, where he was staying with his wife and daughter. “Dating always requires a lot of energy. When you are in your 20s, you have an abundance of it, right? So you can get out and get in front of people more often and more frequently. When you get older, your job is more intense, you have more demands on your time, and it’s really easy to let the quest for finding a mate slip into the other bucket.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Of the Moment The lifestyle newsletter from the Styles, Travel and Food sections, offering the latest trends to news you can use. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“At a certain age I became more conscious of the fact that I knew the following year would be better if I was in a loving, committed relationship with someone that I was going to start a family with,” Mr. Gollash said. “I don’t think any of my married friends had any illusions that I was living the dream. Maybe the guys would joke about it, but I would enlist the help of all the wives of my friends, or the women friends in my life, to help me become a better person, to get ready, so when I met the right person, I was in the right head space.”

Unlike Mr. Gollash, Paul W. Morris, the director of literary programs at the PEN American Center, said he doesn’t want kids and has not resorted to sounding any alarms to let his friends know that he is ready to move on from being single. But that doesn’t mean he would like to stay like this indefinitely.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

This Is 44

“I want a partner for life,” Mr. Morris said over the phone a few hours before the start of his 44th birthday party. “And sometimes, even with my close friends, I have to remind them about that, because it doesn’t look like I want a partner for life, because I’m not taking active control over seeking it. I could make excuses and say the job is what I’m married to, which, I think, is true.

“I’m committed to the work that PEN does. It can’t be over 100 percent, but it is the overarching story of my life, and that is hard to compete with. And so what I am trying to do is find a better balance and actually try to imagine what a relationship would look like.”

At 9 p.m. on this Sunday night, when most single men his age are at home, basking in the light of Netflix or Showtime, he stood among the artists and writers who were celebrating with him at a bar in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn.

Those who still smoked stepped outside. Mr. Morris looked at all the revelers, who were drinking and starting to dance, and said: “I don’t know if this is what 44 looks like. I know it’s what the end of 43 does.”

The next night was when I met with Jean-Marc Choffel at his Manhattan salon. The rain that had sent passers-by under awnings had finally come to a stop. If ever there was a time to step out, it was now. But Mr. Choffel did not budge from the leather swivel chair.

“Tonight I’m doing nothing,” he said. “I could go out, grab a girl, have sex, have fun. But the sense of life is to have kids and try to give them as much as you know. I believe in the power of the universe. I believe the day you go somewhere where you aren’t supposed to be, you end up falling in love and having babies. Definitely, I’m not giving up.”