Steadfast optimism about the country’s ability to move past racial division even in times of tragedy and desperation is a constant theme in Mr. Obama’s philosophy. And this year — with rising fears about terrorism and the killings by and of police officers — has been such a time.

He turned again on Wednesday to that long view, one that has always animated the American spirit. “The America I know is full of courage, and optimism, and ingenuity. The America I know is decent and generous,” he said. “We get frustrated with political gridlock and worry about racial divisions; we are shocked and saddened by the madness of Orlando or Nice. There are pockets of America that never recovered from factory closures; men who took pride in hard work and providing for their families who now feel forgotten. Parents who wonder whether their kids will have the same opportunities that we have.

“All of that is real; we are challenged to do better; to be better. But as I’ve traveled this country, through all 50 states; as I’ve rejoiced with you and mourned with you, what I have also seen, more than anything, is what is right with America.”

He said those words, knowing that throughout history it has always been easier to drive Americans apart, to stoop to the language of hate and peddle scapegoats for every ill.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

At the very start of his journey to the White House, he delivered a speech on race in 2008. He placed his story in the context of a great nation born with a great moral failing, one that seemed impossible to correct: “Words on a parchment would not be enough to deliver slaves from bondage, or provide men and women of every color and creed their full rights and obligations as citizens of the United States. What would be needed were Americans in successive generations who were willing to do their part — through protests and struggle, on the streets and in the courts, through a civil war and civil disobedience and always at great risk — to narrow that gap between the promise of our ideals and the reality of their time.”

Mr. Obama said then that he ran for office to “continue the long march of those who came before us” and to convince the country that we could “perfect our union by understanding that we may have different stories, but we hold common hopes.”

In his eight years in the White House — an entire lifetime for youngsters who have only known a president who is black — Mr. Obama wasn’t able to heal the racial and political divisions despite his efforts and his leadership. He has expressed his regret and disappointment about that failure. But a fundamental truth of history is that change comes slowly and is often recognizable only in retrospect.