“Players when they come up, they have this little window, if they catch the wave, yeah, they’re there,” he said before the Open began. “A lot of guys can play good the first year, but how are you going to play your second year? Your third year? Your fourth, your fifth? I mean, that is where you’re going to actually see how much you’ll develop.”

To Dimitrov, it felt like yesterday that he was where Shapovalov and others are now. Experts flattered him with a “Baby Fed” moniker, a reference to Federer, the third-ranked player in the world. People also told Dimitrov after junior boys’ titles in 2008 at Wimbledon and the U.S. Open that he needed to strike fast on the men’s tour, too.

Grandiose expectations aside, Dimitrov, at 23, rose to No. 8 in the world in 2014. He has earned about $10 million in prize money. He came to New York riding a Masters 1000 tournament victory in Ohio, hoping for that elusive Grand Slam title breakthrough.

And then, in his second-round match Thursday against the lanky Rublev, he managed to blow 4-1 leads in the first two sets and succumbed, 7-5, 7-6 (3), 6-3. He departed the tournament knowing the good news is that his pursuit of greater Grand Slam legitimacy, along with the accompanying cruelty, could continue for as long as a decade, given the recalibration of professional tennis’s career cycle.

“I think I’m just starting my prime,” he insisted, not without justification, in a recent interview at a Midtown hotel.

Once a launching pad to instant stardom for the young and relentless, tennis — for men and women — has become more of an adult-themed province. At the highest levels of the game and below, the path to prominence and head-spinning paydays extends well beyond the norm of generations past.

“Your career span goes from maybe eight to 10 years on the tour to maybe 12 to 15, or even 20,” Dimitrov said. “Somebody said to me the other day, ‘You know, you’re considered like a veteran now.’ I said, ‘What?’ He said, ‘Yeah, there’s a next generation now.’ I said: `Yeah, but just a couple of years ago you were telling me that I’m the next generation. And now you’re telling me that I’m a veteran?’”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What, then, does that make Federer, who remains the tour headliner at 36, and the winner of two Grand Slams this year? After winning his first-round match on Tuesday, Rafael Nadal said, “If you tell me I will be here at 31, being No. 1 of the world, especially, seven, six, 10 years ago, I will not believe you.”

But there he was, the ultimate grinder, showing no signs of departing the game any time soon.

More to Dimitrov’s point about delayed peak performance, Stan Wawrinka won the first of his three Grand Slam titles at 28. Andy Murray did not show his very best until his late 20s.

Below the greats, even the journeymen are notching their best results later and later. The American Sam Querrey reached the Wimbledon semifinals a few months shy of his 30th birthday. The Spaniard Feliciano López achieved his career-high ranking (No. 12) in 2015, the year he turned 33.

While more prominent on the men’s side, the pattern has not escaped the women. The most obvious case is Serena Williams, turning 36 this month and vowing to return as the winning machine she was before pregnancy. Her sister, Venus Williams, at 37, is having her best season in years.

Photo

But a classic example of delayed development is Angelique Kerber, 29, who won her first two Grand Slam titles in 2016 before slumping this year.

The average age of an ATP men’s tour champion in 2016 was almost 29. Fourteen were 30 or older. A decade earlier, there were none that old. While that speaks to the lasting dominance of the men’s big four — Federer, Nadal, Novak Djokovic and Murray — it also provides a clear blueprint for the longer career path.

“I think this generation is going to inspire the rest of the generations to play a schedule that’s achievable, sustainable, so that you can play Grand Slam tennis for a long time,” Venus Williams said at the Australian Open in January, seven months before she was a Wimbledon finalist at 37.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

What Martin Blackman, the general manager of player development for the United States Tennis Association, called “the old paradigm” is not completely dead. Given the absence of several top-10 men’s players, and Federer’s cranky back, one of the younger or very young players could break through next week. Not to be overlooked is how Jelena Ostapenko, a 20-year-old Latvian, announced herself with a stunning championship run at the French Open in June.

“There’s always going to be great young players,” Blackman said.

Echoing Dimitrov, he added, “But it can also be deceiving for one match, one tournament, even one year, due to the demands of the tour, the speed of the game, which is just so physical.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And then there are those impulsive judgments based on the old paradigm. After beating Dimitrov on Thursday, Rublev was actually asked what had taken him so long to deliver a result commensurate with his talent.

“The way I was working, it was not the way to be pro tennis player,” he said. “Now, last year, I change everything completely. I change the team completely. In that moment starts the real work.”

Whatever he does the rest of this year, and probably for a few more, he will be a work in progress, laying the physical and nutritional groundwork while he deals with the pressure of heightened expectation.

“The foundational work needs to be done, and without it the potential for injury and burnout is so much higher,” Blackman said.

The process has been slowed by the veterans’ reluctance to step aside as quickly as in previous eras. In that respect, the Williams sisters set a standard for smart career pacing, uncompromising on rest and exploring outside interests despite calls to more consistently bolster the tour.

When asked in Australia why she and other big names continue to push the sport’s chronological boundaries, Venus Williams said, “I think people realize this is an amazing job, so it’s best to keep it.”

Martina Navratilova knows all about fitness and durability, calling herself “a trendsetter as far as training outside of the court.” That approach helped her to reach the Wimbledon final at 37 in 1994.

“If you play long enough, you pick up so much more knowledge and feel for the game,” she said. “The young guys might have physical advantages, but they can’t always compete against the brain.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Every generation has had a competitive outlier or two, she said, those whose habits and good fortune granted them greater longevity. But thanks to enhanced racket technology and other factors stressing the body, employing a small army of muscle toners and calorie counters is essential.

In Blackman’s time on tour during the 1990s, he said, a player with a coach was ahead of the game. Now the stakes are much higher. The climb for career security is much harder. No matter their age, the players are much needier.

When Dimitrov looks at the cool young players who are turning him into a veteran, “it’s like they have six people traveling with them already.”

And how many attendants travel with him? “Just three,” he said. “I like to keep it simple.”

If the Rublev match taught him anything, it is that the tennis journey, however long it lasts, never is.