There is so much to do in Budapest and it can be hard to know where to begin. Whether you’re in the city for a few days or much longer, these plans will help fill your trip with truly memorable experiences. These loose itineraries take you both to the most famous sights, as well as off the beaten bath; to sites of historical importance and to the modern capital’s newest features. Criss-crossing to the best bits of Budapest, we hope you have a truly magical time, and then we hope you return again to see all the things you might have missed. Welcome to Budapest!

If you have 2 days

Take a break at the Ruszwurm patisserie and indulge in a delicious cake or two – after all Hungary is famous for its confectionery. This cafe is amazing because it’s been operating since 1827! Afterwards, continue on to Matthias Church and the Fishermen’s Bastion for one of the best views in Budapest.

Photo: László Balkányi/We Love Budapest

Photo: László Balkányi / We Love Budapest

Photo: Sziget Eye

If you have 3 days

Photo: László Balkányi/We Love Budapest

Photo: Krisztián Bódis

If you have 5 days

Photo: Krisztián Bódis

at Elizabeth Square On day 5 visit the Budapest Zoo , and if you have the extra budget take a step back in time to the old-world charm and service at the Gundel Restaurant , which is right next to the zoo. In the afternoon try to squeeze in anything you might have missed from the aforementioned suggestions or you could jump on the BKK public boat and head to the Kopaszi Dam or Római Part to relax by the Danube. Kopaszi Dam is more upmarket, with designed green spaces and a variety of lovely restaurants, while the Római Part is more homely with plenty of fried fish vendors and outdoor bars in the warmer months. Both are great to have a more unique Budapest experience as not everyone finds their way to these two locations. After dinner check out the live-music scene at Akvárium Klub

Photo: Kiripolszky Csongor / We Love Budapest

If you have more days

Photo: Krisztián Bódis

Tips for those with children