The Pisces horoscope 2017 shows that for you will begin a year of travel and exploration. Jupiter, the Planet of Good Luck and Fortune, moves into your sector of long-distance connections and travel during October. These three months are the best for you to travel.

Love enters the hot zone and some unexpected issues may arise involving money. You can always plan for the future and try to be as prepared as possible, but something may happen that will be beyond your control.

Pisces 2017 Horoscope: Overview

Let’s begin by talking about the exciting universal vibration of 2017 and how it is going to relate to you, Pisces! The 2017 horoscope for Pisces shows that there’s a fire in the air! Jupiter will enter in Scorpio on Octobre 2017 and for you it is going to be a year of expansion, travel, learning – and perhaps with a little bit of luck thrown in for good measure! Pisces, be adventurous and willing to explore and try new things! And above all, project confidence and act like you have a million pounds in the back, even if you are not certain where your next penny is coming from. If you walk it, you will believe it and so will others.

The 2017 Pisces astrology also points out that in the last 3 months of the year people born under the sign of Sagittarius could enter your life and if they do, fate is at work. Or you may encounter people who work in Sagittarian ruled professions – travel, the law, academia, sports, the mass media or with animals. Your personal beliefs and philosophies will come under review with you perhaps becoming extremely interested in other religions and belief systems and you may change your own viewpoint as a result or incorporate some of these discoveries into your own system.

After Octobre 10th, travel is a strong possibility, so have the passport up to date. However, even if you don’t end up going far due to other circumstances, it is highly likely the world will find you this year and you may encounter people from overseas and faraway even if you don’t leave your neighbourhood. Again, if you do they are there to open up new horizons for you. However, if there is a faraway destination you have always wanted to go to, this are the months to do that or at least set the wheels in motion to get there.

Pisces, you are a sensitive soul, compassionate, understanding, caring and intuitive. It’s a rare occasion when you don’t pick up on others’ true feelings. Often daydreaming about the most idyllic of fantasies, you’re a romantic with a sympathetic and tender heart. Others may not quite understand your kind of mystical and sometimes hazy approach to life. Your mind may float from one idea to the next, but that’s only a testament to your fluid nature. After all, the flowy Fish represent your sign. Self-sacrificing and charitable, you’ll put the needs of others above your own. This unassuming way of life often leads you to swim in your own dreamy stream and live simply.

With transiting Neptune going through your zodiac sign, you have been going through so many personality changes it seems as though you are like a chameleon, always changing your spots. You seem to take on the energies of whatever or whomever you are around.

With all the changes going on in your life, you may be confused about who you really are, Pisces. Your life has had so many life altering events and changes that you don’t really know yourself like you used to. Pisces, you aren’t who you used to be. You might be walking around in a daze or fog waiting for your feet to touch the ground and reunite with reality once again. You may not feel like you are grounded in any kind of stability and reality seems like a dream. You may see yourself as being one way and others are seeing you differently and you may not understand why they don’t understand you. You might be thinking you are putting your messages across to others quite clearly and in reality others are misreading your signals or intent. You have to find someone you can do a reality check with, someone who can be objective and tell you the truth. The Pisces 2017 horoscope suggest to ask yourself, “Are you really who you think you are?”

Pisces Love Horoscope 2017

The Pisces love horoscope 2017 shows that during the year, your thoughts are consumed with your work and professional goals, so your concerns with family life slide to the side. You may easily forget those who are closest to you. Plan ahead like you usually do and be sure to write in special dates like birthdays on your calendar so you don’t forget to at least make a phone call. Pressures from the office ease up around late-December, but your family is eager to spend time with you. Family members may have some good advice for you in regard to your work habits. Family balance shifts this year – you may have to be responsible for a parent this year. Take it in stride, Pisces.

You should not be so focused on your career, social prestige or social status that you overlook your personal life, because you may be waking up in this year and find to some degree that your personal life is in a bit of shambles.

The fact of the matter is you are tired, Pisces. You are overworked and over stressed with all that you have had to do and get done. Take some deep breaths, relax and get off of everyone’s back. Things will get worked out. Don’t try so hard for perfection. It doesn’t exist in this world. And if you try to be perfect, you will break. Ease up on yourself. Don’t be so hard on yourself if you happened to overlook something important, forgot to do something important, or dropped the ball in some important matter. What’s done is done, Pisces. Move on.

This also may be a year of hot sex! Jupiter will be in your sex house till Octobre 2017, and those Pisces coupled up could revive those early days of passion perhaps with a little bit of experimentation. Single Pisces may attract someone in who is adventurous, out-going and has their own kind of irresistible sexiness happening. Just a word about someone like this – they don’t react well to clinginess or neediness. They will need their space but then so do you so this should not be a problem for you. Understand it is the illusion of freedom they seek as opposed to not wanting to be tied down. Provided you can give them this, this could be one of the most satisfying relationships you have ever had and if you are seeking a fellow traveller and lover with whom to explore the big wide world that’s calling to you, this could be the perfect person for you.

The love forecast for Pisces also points out that the August full Moon in your sign will help you to focus on your priorities – in relationships and towards yourself. Have you been neglecting your needs in favour of others? Have you been neglecting to let others know what you need from them in return (in the nicest possible way of course!). Time to understand the difference between neediness and neglect. Full Moons tend to bring our emotions to the surface and you may now be crying ‘But what about me?!’ as a result. Try to think this through without getting things out of proportion or worse, others just seeing you as being demanding or an attention junkie.

This is however a very good full Moon under which to finish up personal projects. If you are feeling a little emotionally short-changed the horoscope advice is to focus on projects and then raise any issues with loved ones after the full Moon starts to wane and then you will be able to get your point across far more effectively.

Back to what I was saying about love earlier. It now has to be big love – or not at all, and this goes hand-in-hand with your desire for a bigger life experience. Tepid love is not your thing now, Pisces, neither is being half way in or ambivalent. You want to experience real passion in 2017, and the kind of person you are likely to attract during this months wants the same.

Remember Pisces, the 2017 forecast for Pisces shows that Jupiter will remain in your 9th house until October 2017, so you have plenty of time to explore passion and anything else that this cycle is associated with.







Pisces Horoscope 2017 For Finance

The 2017 Pisces horoscope for money shows that Jupiter continues to work his way through your 8th house, until Octobre. This house rules personal power, our fears, your salary, sex and things we share with others – joint accounts for example. This transit has traditionally been associated with a legacy or payout of some kind, although we can say that as he will visit this house many times during our lifetime, a legacy or payout will not happen every time he does so.

Some of you Pisces, however may be the beneficiaries of one or of someone else’s generosity. If you do receive a lump sum or are left something during 2017, the question will be what to do with it? You are advised to use it to invest in your future in some way rather than fritter it away.

The Pisces 2017 zodiac also shows that transiting Pluto is going through your solar 11th house of hopes, goals, plans, dreams and wishes. You have gone overboard and probably to great extremes to get what you want, but the price may be bankrupting you in the long run and on many levels. No one can tell you to slow down or what to do about how to spend your time or money. You are hell bent on getting your way and God forbid if anyone should stand in your way. You have been very lucky and fortunate so far in these last few years and you feel like nothing can happen to turn this faucet of good fortune off, but life can do it, maybe not now, but in time.

So Pisces, try to make an effort at shoring up the holes in your wallet or pocket book, stop spending like there was no tomorrow. More does not necessarily make you happier or better off. Some of those investments have paid off, but you should make it a point to put whatever extra money that comes your way into a savings account or solid investment. In other words, Pisces, don’t spend like there was no tomorrow.

You have had many opportunities to hob-knob with the rich and famous and the social elite, but you don’t want to become a social snob. You will wind up falling on your face in the long run. Remember your humble beginnings. Living beyond your financial means could spell disaster down the road. Money may be running through your fingers like water. You may be spending on anything that brings you excitement for the moment, but what about the future, Pisces? You may be numbing your senses with too much of a good thing, like alcohol, cigarettes, gambling, or food.

Pisces Horoscope 2017 For Career

The Pisces 2017 career forecasts shows that at the start of 2017, you might take a serious attitude with your career. Transiting Saturn has been in your solar 10th house and has been squaring your sun sign since 2015, and will continue till December 23, 2017. You are driven to succeed, but you might feel frustrated when things don’t move as efficiently as you would like. You may feel that your boss is too critical and overbearing. If you think you might work better without them always looking over your shoulder, make your thoughts known as soon as you suspect a problem or this predicament could last throughout the year.

It is likely that you have experienced some heavy challenges during this cycle regarding work, career, job, reputation, social reputation and your status in life. You have gotten a lot done and will get even more done before this transit is over. If you have been in business for yourself, this cycle could have meant increased responsibility, or you could have shut down the business all together. Or you could have finally decided to retire. Whatever your decisions about job, career, and work, you have had to take charge to get things done, get the paper work rolling, take on other tasks outside your line of duty, etc. And all the while, you may have felt over burdened and unappreciated for all the hard work you have done.

Having been wearing the “bosses” hat lately, you probably have been quite the taskmaster yourself. You have been giving orders and telling others what to do and how to do it quite forcefully. Are you a little bit short tempered or crabby lately? Well, Pisces, transiting Saturn in your solar 10 th house may be the reason why. But the good side of all this is that things did get accomplished, hopefully without losing friends or having loved ones distance themselves from you.

For some of Pisces, in some ways, this year may be a time when your efforts for these last 7 1/2, 15, or 20 years has comes to fruition. If you have worked hard for a decent retirement plan or worked hard to get your business up and rolling, worked hard to raise your children to be responsible and self-sufficient, then the rewards of this year should prove quite rewarding. But whatever you failed to do, wherever you failed to put in all the hard work that was necessary, then the results could prove disappointing. Now you may have to pay for your lack in some way which could be reflected by a lot of difficulty you have to deal with currently.

Pisces, in your professional life, you have gained much respect and with it a lot of responsibility. If you have pulled yourself up by your bootstraps, then you can stand tall and be proud of where you are now. But Pisces, the horoscope advises: don’t beat yourself up because you haven’t accomplished every thing you wanted to do. You may have been chosen to lead or to be the boss during this cycle, because you have proven yourself worthy to be in the driver’s seat, because of all the hard work you have done in the past. People know you are a take-charge-person; they knew you could get the job done. They know you can be a driving force, a take-charge person, although some might say you were overly controlling or bossy.

If you feel anyone used you think again. You needed them to need you. You did all the hard work because it made you feel good about yourself. So, Pisces, don’t go blaming anyone because you took on so much work. You wanted the job.

Overall, the Pisces 2017 horoscope for career predicts that this year will require hard work, responsibility and discipline at the office. Set your goals high, Pisces, and get to work!







2017 Pisces Horoscope for Travel and Education

Those universal/yearly vibes I was telling you about at the start of this forecast now get supercharged from October 10th, 2017, as Jupiter arrives in his ruling house in your chart – the 9th house.

Eye-opening journeys and experiences open you up to new possibilities and also involve learning on some level – about the world, other cultures and beliefs and also you’ll become more universal in your thinking. It’s not so much a window on the world opening but the doors being thrown open for you to step through. Many people who have never travelled before find themselves on a plane destined for an exotic destination without even being sure how this happened – except it did quickly! As well as people from overseas you will probably meet people who are from your country but extremely well-travelled and you may catch the ‘bug’ from them!

The Pisces 2017 astrology suggest that big ideas are now favoured so the only restrictions you may face are in your own thinking and beliefs around what is and isn’t possible for you. If another human being can do it – so can you. This is your ‘go for it’ year and luck is on your side. Look back 12 years ago and see what was happening back then and what you started, where you travelled to, who crossed your path and what opportunities presented themselves. Expect similar themes to emerge.

This is also an excellent Jupiter cycle for study, as Jupiter rules higher education and academia. If you have been thinking about returning to study something, then do whatever you can now to fulfil that goal. Even if you don’t study formally, you are likely to come across books, people, places and situations in the University of Life that expand your knowledge in some way.

Pisces Monthly Horoscope 2017

Pisces January 2017: Call upon Angelic help if you feel that you really need it. This is the time of year that brings deep exhaustion to all Pisces people. The planetary aspects right now also confirm this, but this is a good time to just kick back, visualize, and dream. This is also a good time to rid yourself of any bad habits because you willpower will be a lot stronger. You will feel an inner urge to begin to take care of yourself better, no matter what demands are placed upon you by others. By the time the Sun moves into Pisces at the end of this month, you will be ready to take on some new challenges. But for now, listen to your heart, finish projects that you want to be completed, and dream, dream, dream. Your dreams and visions can be quite revealing now.

Pisces February 2017: Soft, gentle, and sentimental, you are here to learn to flow with the current of life. Pisces often tries to take the path of least resistance, only to find trouble waiting ahead. These situations can teach you about independence, strength, courage, and willpower, so that you can overcome any obstacle that stands in your way. Learning to say ‘no’ to people and situations that aggravate you is an important lesson this month. Deep down you know what is good for you and what is not. This is the month to begin to apply what you know.

Pisces March 2017: Your ability to see both sides of the coin will put you into a position of leadership. Others will admire your abilities and be willing to support your efforts. You should feel confident that you have what it takes to be successful. Changes regarding your home or office will be a great benefit to you. When you feel good in your surroundings, your ability to work long and hard is easy for you.

Pisces April 2017: Love is the fuel that keeps you going and stimulates you to accomplish great things. If you are in an important relationship right now, the situations between you both will greatly improve. If you are single, this is the time to tell the Universe just what you want in a mate. Picture this person in your minds-eye and know that if you can conceive this image, you can attract just such a person to you too. You will feel spiritually alive. You are looking for an idealistic and boundless kind of love and this is the only kind of love that will be attracted to you during this wonderful phase. Your feelings of devotion run especially deep. Make time for the people that you love because they really love you too. Life is very sweet for you…don’t fret the small stuff it will be taken care of for you very soon.

Pisces May 2017: Your home is your special castle. It’s now time to clean, redecorate, and do everything possible so that your home feels safe, cozy, and comfortable. Get rid of the clutter and prepare for a huge yard sale. The extra money can come in handy during the summer months ahead. Children will take up lots of your time and will want you to come up with some games that they can play. You can easily do this and you will have fun too. In fact, the more children around you the happier you will be. Put your worries and heavy responsibilies on the backburner, it’s time to have some fun!

Pisces June 2017: What you once thought was a problem, turns into a blessing. Everything happens for a reason and now you will finally know what those reasons are. Like fresh clean sheets hanging on the line to dry in the sun…freshness is also coming into your life now too. Where you once cried tears of sadness, you can now cry tears of joy. Whatever area of your life that needs healing, it will be done. Whatever area of your life that needs abundance…that will be done too. Why? Because you have grown and have more knowledge, inspiration and faith than ever before! Keep a special spiritual journal. June is an important turning point in your life.

Pisces July 2017: Have you decided to “consciously” be on your correct life path? Do you know what that path really is? If you do…then you peacefully know what to do. If you don’t…then it’s time to get some expert advice on this important matter. Your dreams are trying to guide you. Write down what you are feeling and watch for signs. The better you know your Self now, the more successful you will be in the future!

Pisces August 2017: This is the perfect month to find out about things that interest you. Catch up on important talks with friends or invite a client out for a competitive sports event or lunch. You stand to gain the most if you entertain people who have something to offer you in return. Competitive sports, or just getting in shape, should be your intent this month. You need an outlet and it’s time you started working at building up your self-esteem and confidence. Make some special plans to get together with someone you are especially fond of. August is a passionate month for you. Channel your passion into the areas of your life that are most important to you.

Pisces September 2017: You’re just not going to take it anymore. You used to stand in the background polite and shy, but now is the time to stand up and speak out for a positive cause. If you are being taken advantage of in any way, you will stop the situation—pronto! Your life is mystical, magical, and can be secure too, but you won’t allow anyone to push your rights aside any longer. You know what is right and what is fair. Your anger begins to surface and all of the suppressed emotions that you have been holding in for so long are being released. The cause you fight for is your own. When you do this in a positive way, the cause you fight for will benefit many. You truly are a rebel with a cause!

Pisces October 2017: What you expect, you will get. For better or worse notice what you are thinking about and determine if these thoughts are negative or positive. Give yourself relief by writing down your concerns and figuring out the most positive solutions. If someone is getting under your skin, or on your last nerve, politely tell him/her, so that their negative behavior doesn’t continue to disrupt your peace of mind. Try not to sweat the small stuff and keep your sense of humor!

Pisces November 2017: This is a great month for going places you’ve never been before. November will be a month of fun, adventure and higher learning for you Pisces. All legal matters will turn out in your favor. Important people will see your point of view. Justice is on your side!

Pisces December 2017: This is a magical time of year for you. You can easily get in touch with your inner-child and have a great time. Show other adults how much fun it can be by putting lots of presents under the Christmas tree. You love to give and this is the season, to show everyone how much you care. A present for you too? Oh what could it be? A pair of socks or a new puppy? Whatever it is, you will adore it because it shows how much someone cares for you too. You are, by far, the easiest people to buy presents for. Everywhere you go, people will see the Spirit of Christmas shining through you. You are the genuine “old souls” of the zodiac dear Pisces. Love, Luck, Happiness, and Success surround you all month through. Have a Very Merry Christmas and A Happy New Year too!

Best Dates For Pisces In 2017

Best Dates For Love January 12

June 21

September 10

September 20

October 5

Best Dates For Work

January 8

May 19

July 23

November 11

December 23

Best Dates For Money

February 3

April 28

June 9

August 27

October 19, 2017 Best Dates For Luck



June 24

December 3

December 3, 2017



Overall, the Pisces horoscope 2017 predicts a year of special or rare opportunities for travel an advancement, to discover more about your world or even about a potential partner can be yours in 2017 – and take you on a journey on into 2018.