Those in Orlando who had seen the unmarked face of the warehouse at 47 W. Jefferson St. probably considered the property abandoned. And then, on that Thursday afternoon in 2013, it blew up.

Witnesses are scarce two years later, but here are the undisputed facts: A ruptured tank storing an experimental cooking gas called hyrdillium was the source of the eruption. The address was registered to the robotics and gaming company Creative Engineering Inc., though no one was inside at the time of the blast. Two trains passing through a station three blocks away were held up for 180 minutes until investigators could be sure the area was safe. One witness described the shockwave as "more intense than a thunderstorm."

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Local man Tim Roth later told The Orlando Sentinel he rushed into the mess before fire, police, or EMTs made it to the scene, looking to rescue survivors. Instead of human bodies, he found mangled, furry animatronic limbs twitching in the rubble, and flaming gorilla heads as big as beach balls in sluggish rotation.

It was, the paper reported, "as if the Joker's lab had exploded."

"It was pressure and rust." So says Aaron Fechter, founder and sole remaining employee of Creative Engineering, when I meet him at the warehouse 18 months later. He is kneeling over the remains of the tank, which is split open on the floor of his warehouse like a discarded banana peel.

Scott Haefner

"Rust worms. These tiny little rust worms that eat through things like a drill. I'd caught them twice before but this third one, well…" Fechter smiles instead of finishing the sentence. Above us, a white milk bottle remains trapped between the roof and rafters, thrown between the two by the explosion in the split second before the ceiling slapped down again. The warehouse is mostly restored—which depleted Fechter's bank accounts—minus a wall on a shared property line with neighboring business Doctor Phillips Charities, who Fechter says went to court demanding it be demolished as structurally unsound. (The charity did not respond to interview requests for this story.)

It was "as if the Joker's lab had exploded."

Had you seen the wall when it was still standing—and you are of a certain age—then there is a good chance you would recognize a mural of Fechter's most famous creation: robot band The Rock-afire Explosion, the glory of birthday parties at more than 200 domestic Showbiz Pizza restaurants in the 1980s. But even if you never went to a Showbiz (or a Chuck-E-Cheese, which bought out the chain years ago), you know the man's work. Right now, somewhere, a gleeful child is smashing a diminutive mammal face in a Whac-A-Mole cabinet game, which Fechter invented. According to Fechter, at least. The people who sell that game now say otherwise.