Be More with Less brings you minimalist fashion challenge Project 333

This page includes everything you need to know to get started. Click here to read Project 333 blog posts

Project 333 is the minimalist fashion challenge that invites you to dress with 33 items or less for 3 months.

My name is Courtney and when I wrote about dressing with less and Project 333 for the first time in 2010, I had no idea that people from around the world would write about their experience and thousands would accept the challenge.

Project 333 was featured in Unclutter Your Life by the Associated Press, on The Today Show website: Today.com, in the March 2014 issue of O, The Oprah Magazine and in the BBC article, The Paradox of Stuff.

Subscribe here for the free Project 333 Capsule Quick-Start Guide …

The Rules

When: Every three months (It’s never too late to start so join in anytime!)

What: 33 items including clothing, accessories, jewelry, outerwear and shoes.

What not: these items are not counted as part of the 33 items – wedding ring or another sentimental piece of jewelry that you never take off, underwear, sleep wear, in-home lounge wear, and workout clothing (you can only wear your workout clothing to workout)

How: Choose your 33 items, box up the remainder of your fashion statement, seal it with tape and put it out of sight.

What else: consider that you are creating a wardrobe that you can live, work and play in for three months. Remember that this is not a project in suffering. If your clothes don’t fit or are in poor condition, replace them.

Quick Start Guides For Project 333

First Timers

This is for those of you new to Project 333. You may have just heard about it, or perhaps you have been quietly watching others live with less for the past three months and you are ready to jump in.

Take inventory. I recommend the How to Make Space approach. How to Finally Clean Out Your Closet will be helpful too. Working with your “I Love” pile of clothing, start to build your wardrobe. It will help to make a list on paper. Consider signature items like a trench coat or pair of boots. Your signature item might be your sunglasses. You will find that having one well made version of something will be far better than 10 of the knock-off. Once you start dressing with less, pay less attention to what you are wearing, or not wearing and more attention to something more important. You are welcome to incorporate some of the bonus rules listed below, but I highly recommend starting with The Basics – listed above. Get connected and ask questions. The Project 333 community is awesome! I’ve included a few important links below to help.

Starting a new phase

This is for those of you who have some experience with Project 333. You completed the first three months and really enjoy dressing with less. You may find that you have more time and space and even that you’ve uncovered your personal style.



Donate any items from your current collection that haven’t been worn. Start building your new wardrobe with items in your current collection. What will make the cut for the next 3 months? Consider what will fit the season and what you love to wear. Box up whatever is not coming with you for the next three months, and mark the box accordingly so you can consider the same items for next year. Make your new list. You have great experience to build your list. What will you change from the first attempt? Stay connected and ask questions. The Project 333 community is awesome! I’ve included a few important links below to help. Encourage new members and let me know how I can help. Take a look at the new bonus rules below. Love them or leave them.

Above All Else

Even more important than choosing clothes that match, sticking with 33 and not wearing PJs to the grocery store, please only include clothing that fits and is in good repair. If you lose (or gain) 20 pounds during the next three months, replace or mend the items. Again, this is not a project in suffering. I want Project 333 to bring you joy not frustration!

Other ways to help you get started and stay connected

Use hashtag #Project333 on Instagram to be featured in a round-up post like this one.

Check out the P333 Community Pinterest Board

Other helpful information

Project 333 is designed for men and women of all ages and lifestyles.

I live in Salt Lake City, Utah. During Phase 1, I had temperatures ranging from 95 degrees to 15 degrees. This can be done with extreme weather variations.

This is not a project in suffering. If you need to create a version of Project 333 that works better for you, do it.

People will not notice that you are dressing with the same 33 items for 3 months, although they may notice there is something different about how you present yourself. You will likely get more compliments. That has been my experience and that of others on this journey.

Check out these starter articles

If this is your first visit, take a look around. You will find tips and ideas to dress with less along with style stories and capsule wardrobe inspiration. Please make yourself at home and start with …

The Tiny Wardrobe Tour

Attend an event on the Tiny Wardrobe Tour, hear Courtney’s story, and hang out for conversation and Q & A. Learn more here.

Try the course

You are not in this alone! For extra guidance, motivation and support join the Project 333 Microcourse: Dress with Less and Create Your Capsule Wardrobe.