The 5 Most Common Relationship Problems for Each Zodiac Sign

Have you wanted to be able to blame something larger than you for your relationship problems? Do you feel as though you genuinely try, however you always seem to struggle? When you find that ‘special someone’ that you would like to spend your life with, you would expect the hardest part to be over, however that is the point where the real work begins!

Astrologers believe that there appears to be a connection between your relationship problems and your zodiac sign. While this won’t solve every challenge you will face throughout your relationships, arming yourself with this knowledge will allow you to be aware of what to watch for, and how you can work to make your next relationship just a little bit easier.

Here are the top 5 relationship problems for your zodiac sign!

Aries: March 21-April 19

You are far too focused on the future before you, calculating every step and where you want things to be in your relationships, rather than stopping to enjoy your relationship as it stands today. You often refuse to take ‘No’ for an answer, regardless of the situation. You feel the need to prove to yourself that you have done everything in your power to save your relationship, regardless of how toxic it may be. This often causes you to stay in a toxic relationship as you can’t bring yourself to walk away. You have a set idea of how things are going to play out and everything you wish to experience, and they are enthusiastic at best. Your partner may struggle to keep up with your pace. You struggle with accepting that not all love lasts, and relationships will sometimes come to an end.

Taurus: April 20-May 20

You are extremely demanding in the bedroom. You struggle to compromise in any area of your life. You can be extremely judgmental of your partners; however, you don’t always adequately put this into words to properly communicate what you wish to address. You like to have everything proper and settled in life, with very few variables, and struggle to adapt to a partner who may not view life in this way. You can be extremely vengeful when you have been crossed, and would rather get even then leave a relationship.

Gemini: May 21-June 20

You feed off a fight, and as such you tend to fight over just about everything, much of it being complete nonsense. You are territorial about your personal living space, needing it to be exactly as you picture it. This causes a significant struggle in regards to trying to incorporate some of your partner’s interior design choices. You can be extremely self absorbed, forgetting that your partner also has needs and desires. You need excitement in your life, so when life becomes routine your fear of getting too comfortable usually spells the end of your relationship. You become so caught up in the passion of the early stages of a relationship, you often fail to remember that people will continue to grow and change after you met them, and may not be the same person down the road that they are today.

Cancer: June 21-July 22

You want marriage and kids more than anything else in your life, however it never seems to be the right time. You always fear that your partner has one foot out the door. You need to feel love and affection constantly, and when you’re not getting that you become bitter and cold towards those around you. When you get too much attention, however, you feel as though you are being suffocated. You can never decide whether you want to stay in a relationship, loving a single person, or keep living the single life and experimenting.

Leo: July 23-August 22

You consistently put too much pressure on how everyone else around you views your relationship. You require financial security and stability in your life, however you hold onto the belief that your partner should be the one to work more to make this happen. You are secretly afraid that your partner will never be good enough for your expectations. You demand far more attention from your partner than you are willing to offer, making your relationships significantly one sided. You bottle your emotions until you lash out at your partner in ferocious tantrums.

Virgo: August 23-September 22

When you get angry you speak before you think, often saying things that you don’t mean. You compromise far too early, often getting hurt as others take advantage of you. You are extremely traditional, and have a difficult time accepting a partner that may be of a different mindset regardless of how much you love them. You want to be at your partner’s side 24/7, doing everything together, regardless of how unhealthy this attachment may be. You often take on far more than you can handle.

Libra: September 23-October 22

You always see the good in everyone that you encounter, and this view makes it difficult for you to comprehend how some people may be toxic in your life. You are an extremely demanding partner and can’t stand to be neglected. You always believe you can save everyone, regardless of what you may be saving them from and how practical this belief may be. You would rather tell a lie than hurt another person, but you aren’t careful enough to avoid being caught. You are extremely indecisive when it comes to your love life, getting sucked into most relationships without actually being ready to commit to one.

Scorpio: October 23-November 21

You have no tolerance for cheating or treason in your relationships, and refuse to give second chances. If someone crosses this line, they are banned from your life for good. You take everything that is said or done personally. You avoid talking about feelings, regardless of whose feelings they may be. The conversation is one that makes you uncomfortable. You hold grudges against your partner for an extremely long time. You often enter into a relationship feeling extremely passionate, however this fades out and you quickly become bored.

Sagittarius: November 22-December 21

Your free spirit and adventurous view of life often clashes with others’ limits and comfort zone triggering several underlying issues in your relationships. You burn your relationships at both ends, leaving both you and your partner feeling drained and fatigued. You assign a significant importance to physical appearance, and are not afraid to speak up if you feel as though your date appears to be lazy or careless. You would rather have justice than reconciliation, and are known to walk away from others without giving them the benefit of the doubt. You desire absolute freedom, wanting to travel alone and have an open relationship, however your partner struggles to come to terms with this mentality.

Capricorn: December 22-January 19

When you have been together with someone long enough you fall into the trap of becoming far too comfortable with them, losing the passion. You agree to decisions regularly that you aren’t comfortable with simply to keep others happy. You avoid fights at all costs, and would rather let your partner deal with any problems on their own. You want nothing more than to please your partner at all times, forgetting about your own needs and desires. You continuously make excuses for unhealthy relationships.

Aquarius: January 20 to February 18

You and your partner are unable to have a real conversation about your future together as you are afraid that doing so will require compromise, robbing you of opportunities and experiences in life. You often feel as though you are misunderstood. You have a fear of being bored, and for that reason you would rather leave for something new than stay to fight for a relationship. You refuse to allow yourself to get too close, requiring a great deal of space from your partner. Often you need more space than your partner is comfortable giving. You are an expert debater and communicator, however at times things are lost in communication and you find yourself frustrated when your partner can’t live up to your personal goals and ideas.

Pisces: February 19 to March 20

You struggle with the idea of expressing your emotions, which often leads to being misunderstood by your spouse. You resent anyone who doesn’t open up to you and share a vulnerable side. You are highly reserved, which your partner may see as you playing hard to get. You often feel like you care about the people in your life more than any of them care about you. In order for you to recover from the stresses of life you require significant time alone, which is not something that your partner generally enjoys as much as you do.

LIKE OUR PAGE Share on Facebook





Comments

comments