But know this: I’m also going to engage in some unvarnished truth-telling. Not just about what’s good and bad in fashion, but what it’s like to be on this treadmill. Because glamorous as it sounds, it is also that: four weeks, no weekends, no free evenings, no regular meals except breakfast, show after show after show.

We’ll kick it all off with next Friday’s newsletter, which will be a special issue devoted to answering as many of your questions about fashion week as possible. So go ahead: Ask me what you’ve always wanted to know.

In the meantime, however, for some final perspective before we all go through the collection looking glass, spend some time with us remembering the colorful life of David Tang, meditate on the question of “When is a shoe not just a shoe?” (when it’s a stiletto and Melania Trump wears it to a disaster zone) and find out how Fabien Baron spends his Sundays.

See you on the other side.

The Story Behind the Image

The renowned fashion and art photographer Jamie Hawkesworth opens a new show, “Landscape With Tree,” in Amsterdam next month. Here, his work “Adam,” 2016.

Your Style Questions, Answered

Every week on Open Thread, Vanessa will answer a reader’s fashion-related question, which you can send to her anytime via email or Twitter. Questions are edited and condensed.

Q: I’m a mid-20s professional working in the city. I work at an office job but often will walk around and run errands after work, and I find myself completely destroying the super-cute work shoes that I spent a few hundred dollars on. I want to try and avoid spending a lot of money. I’m also not a fan of changing shoes before and after work because I like to maintain my appearance of looking put-together during my commute and especially if I meet friends. Do you have any suggestions for classic-looking flats that are reasonably priced but are also of relatively high quality?

A: The shoe question is actually much on my mind because of the looming fashion week. Some editors who shall remain nameless largely get around in this time period via black cars, thus creating a situation in which they can wear any shoes they want (I have seen high-heeled sandals in the snow), but those of us who use the subway and are endlessly marching from Eighth Avenue stops to shows on the West Side Highway and back have to think strategically. We have to think, in other words, of shoes just like the shoes you are describing. So after a decade-plus of show experience, here is what I have settled on:

1. Ballet flats by Repetto. They go with almost everything. Get taps put on for longer life, and though they will wear out, they aren’t so pricey you feel bad about replacing them.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

2. Nike’s Lunarlon sneakers in a sort of silky black techno fabric: fancy enough to look good with trousers, and very comfortable. Also, not crazy expensive. Another good option here: the Converse/Missoni collaboration.

3. Motorcycle boots. These will be more expensive, but they’re also more elegant than Dr. Martens, and their very thick treads mean they last. I have had mine for years. I wear them in the winter with tights, and in the autumn without.

4. If you are willing to invest a bit, a chunky low Flower heel by Ferragamo, designed by Paul Andrew. I bought a pair at the beginning of the summer and have worn them continuously ever since. It has just enough height so it flatters the leg line and doesn’t feel like a flat, but the heel is thick enough, and short enough, that it walks like one. That’s a harder combination to find than you may think. — VANESSA FRIEDMAN