Yes, you've had apple cider vinegar (or ACV, if you prefer) in your cabinet for years, but it's currently having a moment. Whether you're drinking it straight or getting ready to pickle everything in sight, apple cider vinegar is truly a pantry staple.

If your bottle has sat unused and unloved for too long, you probably just need some new ways to use it. You're in luck! These 15 recipes rely on ACV to varying degrees, but they all wouldn't be the same without it. Now the only question you have to answer is filtered or unfiltered?

When you first read through the recipe for fire cider, you'll probably find it a bit overwhelming and intimidating. It includes horseradish, garlic, and onion along with ginger, rosemary, and honey all in an apple cider vinegar base. But once you give this infusion a try (especially if you feel a spring cold coming on), we bet you'll be a believer in its soothing punch.

You'll add the apple cider vinegar to the beet brine to make these brilliantly colored deviled eggs. If you haven't tried this appetizer upgrade, you're missing out.

Our favorite way to serve this fresh, cabbage-laden salad is alongside a bowl of hearty chili. The cider vinegar in the dressing helps cut through the rich flavors of the meat. If you put away your chili pot for the season, serve this alongside barbecue instead.

How do you turn Waldorf salad into a full meal? By adding chickpeas, of course. The dressing has also taken a lighter turn in this recipe, swapping the mayo for plain yogurt and apple cider vinegar.

Like shrubs, this drinking vinegar has a long history. The most traditional version has apple cider vinegar, ginger, and a sweetener. We tested all kinds of sweeteners to see which worked best; in the end, it's up to you what kind of flavor profile you want.

The apple cider vinegar comes into play in this recipe in the form of pickled red onions, which sit atop the sardine spread. For anyone who's a fan of sardines, you'll love this combo.

Just like nutritional yeast, you'll find plenty of apple cider vinegar in vegan cheese recipes to bring that sharp edge that's similar to cheddar. This vegan queso is no exception.

Apple cider vinegar is a no-brainer when it comes to making dressings for grain or green salads — especially when there are other fruits involved. It's a great base for other flavors, and has enough sweetness from the apples to not overpower more subtle notes the way white vinegar would.

Turmeric is one of the hottest ingredients at the moment. When you combine it with apple cider vinegar in this saturated drink, you're bound to feel colorful yourself. Of course, this will also help settle a too-full belly after a rich dinner.

If you want to prepare cabbage, but don't want to do a slaw, try this pressure-cooker braised cabbage instead. With plenty of spice from cayenne pepper and red pepper flakes, you'll see the veggie in a whole new light.

It's not quite barbecue season where we live yet, but we'll be saving this cider beans recipe to go with all our summer cookouts. The key is using both apple cider vinegar and apple cider for a perfectly balanced sweet-and-sour flavor.

Slaw isn't just for cabbage; you can use any number of greens in its place. This version, which has collards as a base, gets extra color from purple cabbage, carrots, and pomegranate seeds, and, of course, a dose of apple cider vinegar in the dressing.

There are so many types of chutneys out there, but we're partial to those made with savory tomato and tangy vinegar. It can be easily adapted with different spices depending on your preferences, and goes on everything from grilled cheese to crackers on a charcuterie plate.

In this vegan curried salad, the cider vinegar is used to plump up the raisins and then gets added into the mix to give the dressing some bite.

This collards and kimchi dish proves that some mash-ups were meant to be. The apple cider vinegar here is used to deglaze the pan that the bacon (did we mention there's bacon?) and collards are cooked in.

Making your own pickles couldn't be easier if you follow this quick guide. Don't hesitate to experiment with other vegetables beyond cucumbers, like zucchini, carrots, and radishes.

Classic pork and beans can be made in just 30 minutes flat if you lean on canned beans to get the job done alongside flavorful ingredients like apple cider vinegar, molasses, and Worcestershire sauce.

The title of this recipe says it all. This is one of those salads you're sure to turn to time and time again whenever you need a simple side dish or satisfying potluck addition.

Both apple cider vinegar and hard apple cider are incorporated into this recipe to ensure it's full of rich and tangy apple flavor.

This extra-tender, juicy pork has so much potential once the slow cooker has done all the work. You can't go wrong with making tacos, adding it on salads, or simply piling it on a bun.