But more than that, travel insiders around the Balkans have long yearned to trade the region’s oily image of strife for that of the crisp fabric of an emerging adventure-travel destination. The efforts appear to be working. In 2014, 3.7 million international tourists visited Albania, up from about 645,000 in 2004. And in Montenegro, you can sea kayak through the watercress on Skadar Lake or catch feisty trout in green Macedonian streams, both with guides.

Few Balkan countries beyond Croatia and Greece can entice transoceanic travelers as stand-alone destinations at the moment but, collectively, places like Bosnia, Macedonia, Montenegro and Albania can make for a wildly fascinating itinerary. Kosovo wants in on that action. Brezovica may be its best shot.

“Kosovo is absolutely ready for something like this,” said Pascal Roux, the chief executive of MDP Consulting and leader of the French consortium. “Brezovica could be the pearl of the Balkans.”

Maybe so, but “it’s just hugely important to be sure it’s done right,” said Christopher Doyle, executive director for Europe of the Adventure Travel Trade Association, which champions sustainable adventure travel markets. What is needed, he said, are “thoughtful supporting efforts to engage the local community and protect the environment.”

Across the Balkans, there is little doubt that skiing is having a moment. Ecosign, a Canadian mountain resort planning firm that has designed Alpine skiing venues for five Winter Olympics, has completed 15 master plans for new or drastically reorganized resorts, including three in Macedonia, four in Serbia and two in Greece. A Dubai-based firm in December announced plans to build a $5 billion “tourist city” with thousands of holiday homes near Bosnia’s Bjelasnica mountain, where the Olympics were held. Kopaonik, Serbia’s most developed ski resort, added a new six-person heated chairlift last year and a new hotel. Poiana Brasov in Romania recently spent €30 million expanding its terrain, adding snow-making and upgrading lifts.

If anyone stands to lose on the Brezovica deal, it’s Igor. His grandfather, Radojko Nikolcevic, was the ski area’s first general manager after the resort opened in 1954. In the ’70s he built a hut that would become Tina’s pizzeria under Igor in 1993. Today the Nikolcevices earn enough money selling pizzas in winter to last them the rest of the year. Now the consortium will level almost everything — the hotels, the village, the lifts. The Nikolcevices will get about $250,000 in expropriation fees, but money isn’t the issue.

“We’re happy people want to invest in the resort but never in my life have I been as afraid for my future as I am right now,” Igor said. “The mountains are in me.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Travel Dispatch Newsletter Every Saturday, get travel tips, destination coverage, photos from all over the world and more. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Over the next three days a frustrating pattern emerged. Each morning I awoke to another foot of snow, and each morning the lifts weren’t running. The Dane guys weren’t offering the seven-euro special. Hiking up alone would be misery. Still, I hoped for the best.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I lounged around Tina’s watching the snowflakes hit the windows or took naps under a shaggy blanket in Tina’s old room. The Nikolcevices treated me like family. We sat near the fire talking about life in Kosovo. On the war: “Stupid politicians caused it.” On being Serbs surrounded by Albanians: “We never have an argument.” On why I should not clear the table: “This is Balkans,” Draginja said. “Women do this.”

I helped anyway and then serviced my macho deficits by grabbing a shovel to clear snow off the pizzeria’s roof. The electricity flickered on and off.

“There is something beautiful when everything is broken,” Draginja told me later over a meal of tangy mountain cheese, winter cabbage and a Serbian dish of shredded pork called duvan cvarci. “Everyone comes together.”

On the fourth day, the storm thinned into a delicate fog, and, miracle of miracles, the lifts creaked to life. At last I could ski.

I raced out the door. Classic rock blared from the Che & Fox cafe. Vendors jammed folding tables into the snow to peddle Serbian beer, Austrian juices and Lucky Strikes. A man in the parking lot sat next to a delivery truck with a cardboard sign: ski rentals €5. I clicked into my own skis and scooted up to a double chair called Livada, or “meadow” in Serbian. It rose lazily over an abandoned stone mansion called Stojko’s house, one of the few buildings that will remain. A man stood next to the entrance ready to check my lift ticket. I didn’t have one. I asked where to buy it.

“No, no, you don’t need a ticket,” said a voice in English behind me. I turned to see two men on skis. One of them in a red jacket shuffled forward, said something in Serbian and pressed about $3 worth of coins into the attendant’s palm. “Come, come,” my new friend said, and off we went.

Photo

Rexhep Krasniqi, 58, had fled Kosovo 23 years ago as a refugee and now worked as a contractor in London. He had returned to ski with his younger brother, Isak, who had run a refugee camp in Macedonia before landing a job in finance. Isak was now unemployed but not worried. “We are good at surviving,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I spent most of the day skiing with the Krasniqis, who explained the ticket system. A price list said I could buy anything from a single ride to 10 days of unlimited rides, but almost no one consulted it. Instead they negotiated rates with the attendant. A single ride cost about $3.25, though Rexhep had bargained to get both of us at least two rides for that. As best as I could tell a day pass cost about $11.

Now, new for this winter, workers have installed an electronic ticket-reader and day passes have jumped to about $21, a fortune when the average worker earns about $380 a month. “No more corruption,” a local told me later, “but less skiers.”

We picked our way through a steep notch called the Lion’s Gate and found untracked lines through the trees. Wind-powered snow roared off the ridge behind us in great white flames. The snow hissed violently off the bottoms of my skis to form blue contrails. Most of the terrain was intermediate to expert-only. The revamped resort will have more beginner runs.

Eventually we stopped for lunch on a patio at a slopeside hut called Cafe Collmar, where a waiter brought us coffee, brandy and cheesy bread. Rexhep refused to let me pay the $5 bill. “No Albanian in Kosovo will ever let you pay,” he said, politely but firmly. “You are American, and to us Americans are like Jesuses.”

My last day dawned a piercing blue and the air shimmered with suspended snow crystals. This time Igor and a friend from Belgrade, Marko Nikolic, showed me a wild backcountry run that dropped through miles of open powder into a tight stream bed. Marko, a mountain guide, then invited me to climb to a high point in the resort, 8,274-foot Pribreg mountain, where we could find the longest, most challenging runs back to the base.

We rode Livada up as high as it went, then I slung my skis over my shoulder and kicked steps up the sastrugi beyond the top station. We gained an easy ridge and made the summit after 45 minutes. A lift once came all the way up here but it hadn’t worked in years, and the top wheelhouse was completely entombed in tons of feathered ice. The slope below was so steep it gave me vertigo.

Photo

Soon all of this would be very different. I tried to picture a brand-new lift stitched into the rock, the sprawling village where Tina’s once stood, and the legs I’d need to ski all those new runs. I had one foot in Macedonia, the other in Kosovo, and five more countries in view.

It may have been selfish, but Brezovica felt perfect as is. We have so many polished resorts already but so few that can foster skiing at its most authentic without any flash. Even more selfish: What do you do when you know one of your favorite places to visit, a secret, is about to blow up? Don’t you long for it to stay the way it is?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Brezovica has to change, of course. As anyone in Kosovo knows, stop moving for long enough and someone will come bury you.

Marko wasted no time. He strapped on his snowboard. I lowered my goggles. Then we both pushed off and floated through a beautiful, broken world.

IF YOU GO

Getting There

Pristina (PRN) and Skopje (SKP) are the closest airports to Brezovica. There are no direct flights to either city from the United States. Check fares on Turkish Airlines, Swiss, Lufthansa, Austrian Airlines, SAS, EasyJet, Delta, Alitalia and Norwegian for connecting in Europe.

What You Should Know

This winter will likely be the last to see Brezovica in all of its rundown glory. In its current state, the resort is not for everyone. The lifts may not run every day. There is no such thing as customer service. It’s unclear what facilities will be open next winter. For updates check the Sar Planina-Brezovica Facebook page or the Brezovica Resort Facebook page. The ski area also has a website but it isn’t very helpful: brezovica-ski.com.

Guides

Hiring a guide to help you find a place to stay and arrange airport transfers is a must at the moment. Igor Nikolcevic is neither a guide nor an outfitter but he speaks very good English and can help arrange transfers, especially from Pristina, lift tickets, guides and lodging. Message him through the Pizzeria Tina Facebook page. Outdoor Albania, an outfitter based in Tirana, also runs custom trips to Brezovica. (OutdoorAlbania.com; info@outdooralbania.com).

Transfers and Lift Tickets

Expect to pay about 50 euros each way for transfers from Pristina. Lift tickets now cost €20 a day.