You know, we use ad-blockers as well. We gotta keep those servers running though. Did you know that we publish useful books and run friendly conferences — crafted for pros like yourself? E.g. our upcoming SmashingConf Barcelona , dedicated to smart front-end techniques and design patterns.

By Veronica Picciafuoco

April 3rd, 2013

Rule number one for designers of all kinds: use a contract. Sometimes, this is easier said than done. Should I use a service agreement? A retainer? A licensing contract? With the help of Docracy1, we collected the experience of many designers to provide a wide range of starting points for less experienced creative professionals, and to start a permanent free legal resource for the community.

Below you’ll find a collection of legal documents curated by our fantastic community. We are looking for your feedback and contribution to grow this collection. Suggest more items or add the contract you use for your own work. You might also want to have a look at our already published set of 10 basic agreements2 for designers.

Further Reading on SmashingMag: Link

Important notice: free sample documents and commentary are never a substitute to legal advice. Because every situation can be different, only a lawyer can answer your legal questions and assist you with a contract. The contracts below are useful examples, but they are sourced from a community of people and come without any guarantee, so treat them as general information. Smashing Magazine and the respective contributors of the documents disclaim all liability in connection to the use of these documents.

What Document Should I Sign With My Client? Link

If you created an icon set:

Icon License Agreement 7

Drew Wilson’s license for the Pictos Icon Set, with popular standard terms.

Drew Wilson’s license for the Pictos Icon Set, with popular standard terms. Icon Designer Contract8

A very basic contract for commissioned icon project.

If you are building a responsive website:

If you are starting a graphic design project:

If you’re doing a small project with design and code:

If you’re doing a BIG project with design and code:

If you’re doing UX work:

Contract for User Experience Design20

A version of Contract Killer, customized for UX work.

If you’re creating an infographic:

Infographic Killer 321

A verison of the Contract Killer for commissioned infographics.

If a third party wants to use your work:

Copyright Ownership and License Agreement2216

A super-simple assignment agreement for any sort of intellectual property (code, design, copy, etc.). Tip: better sign this only after money is in the bank.

If you’re redesigning a website:

If you’re hiring a developer/designer to work on a project:

Independent Developer Agreement 25

A balanced independent contractor agreement, written from the point of view of the hiring company.

A balanced independent contractor agreement, written from the point of view of the hiring company. Independent Contractor Agreement26

A catch-all independent contractor agreement.

If you’re hired as a freelance developer:

Independent Contractor Agreement (Developers) 27

Ross Kimbarovsky’s “contract for software developers who hate contracts”.

Ross Kimbarovsky’s “contract for software developers who hate contracts”. Software Licensing Agreement28

If you decide to licensing your code rather than assign it, this document is very helpful.

If you’re making a mobile application:

If things go wrong:

Cease & Desist Letter 32

A handy C&D letter if someone is “stealing” your intellectual property.

A handy C&D letter if someone is “stealing” your intellectual property. Friendly Collection Letter33

A friendly but firm reminder for clients who don’t pay on time.

Other helpful documents:

I Want To Add My Own Document Link

38add yours4039

Eager to share your own experiences on documents? Please leave a comment, question or suggestion. Also, we’d love to include more documents in this article! Feel free to add yours4039! We’ll look at all documents which we receive and add the best ones to this guide!

Extra: Free “Legal Guide” Icon Set Link

You like the icons in this guide? Alvaro Casanova41, designer for Docracy.com, offers you to download the set for free42 (retina and standard).

Credits of image on front page: storebukkebruse43.

(vf) (ea)

↑ Back to top Tweet itShare on Facebook