Becoming a celebrity requires talent, hard work, perseverance, and a crapload of good luck. Or, alternatively, just the last thing. That probably explains why Hollywood types are so susceptible to agreeing to stupid bets -- in their minds, they're waltzing through their cosmically charmed lives, incapable of ever being wrong or losing the smallest argument. To the delight of the rest of us mortals, that's not always the case. Because the consequences are often hilarious ...

6 Morgan Freeman Lost A Bet, Had To Record Zach Braff's Voicemail Morgan Freeman Lost A Bet, Had To Record Zach Braff's Voicemail

Morgan Freeman is often referred to as the "Voice of God" because of his velvety smooth delivery, and because he's literally played God. The man has narrated everything from penguin marches to Visa commercials to the voice commands on Batman's beefed-up bike ... and one lucky A-hole's phone greeting. This A-hole:

Warner Bros. Pictures

Yup, the fellow in the lower-right corner whom you've never seen before!

Recently, Freeman teamed up with his Dark Knight trilogy co-star and fellow smooth-voice-haver Michael Caine for a heist movie about a bunch of old farts who are after one last score. The film, Going In Style, was directed by Zach Braff, best known for playing a man who overcomes his various mental incapacities to become a doctor in the touching medical drama Scrubs. It seems that Freeman and Braff had a disagreement on set. Braff claimed that the shot they were preparing was Freeman's last on the film, while the actor insisted that it couldn't be so. Unashamed to take advantage of an 80-something's memory, Braff proposed a bet: If he was right, the owner of one of the most distinctive voices on the planet had to record the outgoing voicemail message for his phone.

And that's why, when anyone calls Braff, they get ear-sexed by Morgan Freeman himself asking them to leave a message. It's almost worth calling Zach Braff to hear. Not surprisingly, Freeman is also really, really goddamn tired of people asking him to do the same for them. Perhaps Daniel Day-Lewis, now that he has nothing to do all day, can fill this niche and record messages as Abe Lincoln.