The pressure cooker is an old-fashioned appliance that is enjoying a renaissance of sorts, and there are many good reasons why. Chief among them is the fact that it just cooks so many foods so well; if you have a pressure cooker, you know what I mean. You probably had a gateway experience that made you say Oh! This is what this thing can do.

For me, that gateway cooking experience was simple and elemental: soft- and hard-boiled eggs. The pressure cooker makes them better than any other method I know. Here's how!

How To Cook Eggs in an Electric Pressure Cooker:

Watch the Video

On Electric Pressure Cookers

The other reason that pressure cookers are enjoying renewed popularity, in my opinion, is the rise of the electric pressure cooker. Unlike stovetop pressure cookers, which need a little more supervision, an electric model behaves like a slow cooker; set it and walk away. It's a nice blend of old-fashioned technology and modern convenience.

The only catch to electric pressure cookers is that they aren't as powerful as stovetop models, so recipes need a little adaptation. But I haven't found that to be a problem. I have a Cuisinart pressure cooker and really love it.

The Advantages of Cooking Eggs in a Pressure Cooker

Whether you're cooking with an electric or a stovetop pressure cooker, you can be assured that it's pretty fabulous for eggs. Why? Well, if you eat hard- or soft-boiled eggs daily, as I like to do, it's a great way to make a big batch at once.

But even more importantly, given the steam pressure applied to the eggs, the cooked eggs peel really easily! Here's a tip test Anjali ran that demonstrates this:

Read the tip test: Is the Best Way to Make Easy-to-Peel Eggs in the Pressure Cooker?

Ever since I acquired a pressure cooker and saw how easy this was, I was hooked. I consulted a few different sources on cooking eggs in the pressure cooker, and by far the best is Laura Pazzaglia's Hip Pressure Cooking site. If you're just getting into pressure cookers, I highly recommend her as a resource. Here are two great posts on pressure cooking eggs:

In my own egg adventures, I've found some variances from Laura's guideline — mostly because each machine is different, and also everyone has different preferences as to how runny they want their eggs. Hence the range of times below.

Put a steamer basket and 1 cup of water in your electric pressure cooker: Insert the steamer basket that came with your pressure cooker, or just a generic folding steamer basket like the one shown here. Pour in 1 cup cold water.