Photo

Samantha Joel’s wedding vows have citations.

A psychology graduate student at the University of Toronto, she developed (along with her now-husband) 10 promises based not on religion or tradition but on scientific research. She’s not alone — another psychology grad student posted her science-based vows at Scientific American in December. And a study examining how factors like wedding size and cost relate to the length of a marriage made a splash in the fall — The Atlantic ran a story on it titled “The Divorce-Proof Marriage.”

Scientifically backed relationship advice seems to be enjoying a wave of popularity, and many say it can be helpful. But can data really prevent divorce? And do we necessarily want it to?

“I really believe that research can inform our personal decisions better than anecdotes, better than advice from individuals, better than intuition,” said Ms. Joel. “I believe in a data-driven approach to everything, including relationships — and in fact particularly relationships, since that’s what I study.”

The scientific method is “the best way to answer questions,” she added. “We accept this in pretty much every domain of life — with relationships, I think, though, people get a little bit anxious that love is being reduced.” But “if you want real answers that are actually helpful, you need to get specific and you need to get objective.”

Her 10 promises — which she and her husband read aloud at their wedding — include a pledge “to support and protect your freedom; because although our lives are intertwined, your choices are still yours alone.” This one is based on research showing that a lack of autonomy in relationships can make people less happy. She and her husband also promised each other to “show you, every day, that I know exactly how lucky I am to have you in my life,” inspired by a study showing that people who feel more appreciated by their partners are more appreciative in return, and that they are less likely to break up.

“Expressing appreciation to your partner, noticing the things you love about them and telling them that you love those things about them,” said Ms. Joel, “just has wondrous effects. They feel appreciated, and then in turn they feel better, and just expressing the gratitude makes you feel better, and then they want to reciprocate the gratitude, so then they appreciate you more which makes you feel better.”

The 10 promises are now posted on the couple’s fridge, and Ms. Joel says they’ve proved helpful. “I think my exposure to relationship research has really helped my relationships — my romantic relationship and my other close relationships, too.”

Katherine Hertlein, a professor of marriage and family therapy at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, also thinks understanding research about relationships can be useful for couples. They might benefit, for instance, from knowing about work suggesting that “a certain level of egalitarianism” in relationships seems to be healthy. Also potentially useful: Research on how people’s conception of an ideal relationship affects their real lives. If you “don’t experience your relationship as living up to that ideal,” she said, “you’re not going to be as successful. So couples who have a minimized ideal-real gap are the ones who tend to do better.”

Less applicable, she argued, is data on factors like the size of the wedding. “I really believe some of those variables are context-driven,” she said. If small weddings are correlated with shorter marriages, other factors may be at play. Maybe some couples invite fewer guests because their family members don’t get along, and “when couples have problems with their family of origin, those are couples who actually are going to be less likely to be successful.” So if you’re counting wedding guests, it’s “the reason for the size that actually becomes more important.”

Andrew Francis-Tan and Hugo M. Mialon, the authors of the wedding study, also said in an email that their results may not reveal anything about the causes of divorce: “While we find that weddings expenses are inversely correlated with marriage duration, this does not necessarily imply that spending more on a wedding will cause a marriage to be less likely to last. Perhaps those couples who tend to have more expensive weddings are simply those couples that tend not to be the best match for each other to begin with.”

Their findings show that expensive weddings don’t mean longer-lasting marriages, but they don’t show that cheap ones will protect you from divorce. “If we were to give broad advice on the basis of our study,” they said, “the advice would simply be: Ignore pressure from wedding industry advertising and do what you think will maximize your joint long-term happiness.”

Amie Gordon, one of the authors of the study on appreciation cited in Ms. Joel’s vows, cautions that relationship researchers often start by “looking at what happens naturally in a relationship” — what couples are already doing, and how that affects their bond. If couples who show gratitude to each other have healthier relationships, that doesn’t necessarily mean ungrateful partners who start behaving more gratefully will necessarily see their relationships improve. “If couples try to inject gratitude, or any other positive behavior, in their lives in a way that is not authentic, it’s possible it could backfire,” she explained in an email. “So when considering whether to apply research to one’s own life, people need to know whether the researchers simply measured what was already naturally occurring, or if they asked people to do something different.”

Research on happiness, she added, “shows that different happiness interventions (gratitude, optimism, etc.) work well for different types of people. I think it’s probably similar for relationships — people have to do what feels right to them, so I’d suggest they try out research that resonates with them.”

And Vicki Larson, co-author of the book “The New ‘I Do’: Reshaping Marriage for Skeptics, Realists and Rebels,” has pushed back against the idea that its possible to protect oneself from divorce. In an essay for Divorce360, she writes, “you can’t affair- or divorce-proof a marriage because you can’t control another person’s behavior, you can only control your own.” And, she said in an interview, “even if you fight well, even if you’re having sex, even if you’re doing all the things in a marriage” that therapists would recommend, “you can’t control what your spouse is doing.”

“All you can do is just really be the best person you can,” she said, “and then hope that you married the right person.”

And, she said, you might not even want to “divorce-proof” your marriage. “Sometimes divorce is the healthier thing to do,” she said. “Our only marker right now of a successful marriage is longevity,” she added. But other markers are possible — a couple could consider their marriage successful if it allowed them to raise children together, for instance. “It really is up to a couple to decide what it is that they want to accomplish in the marriage.”

“You have to ask yourself, ‘Well, why do I want to get married? What do I want?’” Answering those questions, she said, will help you “find a better partner, someone with the same goals” and make it “more likely that you will have a successful marriage by the way you define it.”

Ms. Joel agrees that true “divorce-proofing” isn’t possible. “We don’t have it all figured out yet,” she said. “Relationship science is a young science,” she explained, “and it’s such a complex process that right now we can’t give the kind of concrete, certain answers that people want.”

“The thing is though, no one can give those answers, and the people claiming that they can are really full of it.”