Crave a veggie burger.

Sweet Potato Tahini Bean Burgers

"real" burger

Valentine's Day

Real Food Daily

"A salad of baby greens, roasted baby beets, tangerines, smoked almond crusted ‘goat cheese’ flirting with a creamy shallot dressing"

So today,

Easy Burger.

creative

healthy

Dig in.

I was still feeling Valentine's Day-y..



By Kathy Patalsky Published 02/21/2012

Sweet potato veggie burgers with avocado, family-approved go-to dinner . Ingredients 1 medium sweet potato, baked and peeled

16oz. cooked white beans (canned, drained and rinsed)

1/2 cup white onion, chopped

2-3 Tbsp tahini

3/4 tsp apple cider vinegar

1 tsp garlic powder

1/2 - 1 tsp chipotle powder (or cajun spice) (use more for spicier burgers)

1/2 tsp salt

1/4 tsp black pepper (add more for more bite!)

1/3 cup nutritional yeast OR any flour (try oat flour)

1/2 - 1 cup finely chopped greens (kale, spinach, parsley)

toppings: avocado, tomato, vegenaise, burger buns, greens

skillet: 1 Tbsp virgin coconut oil

optional: Panko bread crumbs for crispy coating Instructions Bake your sweet potato in a 400 degree oven for 40-60 minutes or until tender. If in a hurry, you could use the microwave, but oven-baked yields a bit more flavor. Add the potato and beans to a large mixing bowl. Using a large fork, mash well. Fold in the onion and keep mashing. Add all the remaining burger ingredients and mash, mash, mash well until thickened and mashed well. Tip! Rinse your beans in hot water before adding to bowl, this heats them, making them easier to mash. Heat oven to 400 degrees. Heat a skillet over high heat and add the coconut oil. Form burger mixture into large patties and place on the hot skillet. If using Panko bread crumbs, roll patties in Panko to coat well. Cook 1-3 minutes on each side, just to brown them. Repeat with all the mixture, you should yield 6 large patties or 8 small. Tip: Place mixture in the fridge for a half hour if you want it to be super easy to form into patties, this will increase cooking time by a few minutes though. Place the skillet-cooked patties on a baking sheet and bake for 10-15 minutes, until cooked through. Note: YES you could skpi the skillet part and just bake the veggie burgers, but the flavor is better with those crispy coconut-oil seared edges. Slice up all your burger toppings and toast the buns. Sprouted grain were used! Add vegan mayo or spicy mustard and the patty and toppings. Serve warm! Store leftover burgers, sealed, in the fridge for up to a day, or freeze and consume within a few weeks for best flavor and texture. To reheat: warm in a 400 degree oven until warmed through, about 12 minutes, depending on burger thickness. Yield: 6-8 patties Prep Time: 00 hrs. 10 mins. Cook time: 00 hrs. 20 mins. Total time: 30 mins. Nutrition Calories: 176g

Fat: 4g

Protein: 7g

Dietaryfiber: 5g

Totalcarbs: 30g Tags: veggie burgers , entree , sweet potatoes , dinner , easy , avocado , entree

Note: yes this patty does fall kind of apart as you eat it. But that is OK because it tastes yummy.

One with Panko-crusted edges - infused with tender sweet potato and creamy, rustic white beans. Tall stacked on a toasted grain bun - crisp romaine leaves sprawling out the sides. Lime green avocado. Dijon. Pepper. Zesty onion.Theseare super easy to make. Satisfy your burger craving in a flash. And while you are stacking toppings, humming happy burger-eating music, sipping lemonade, ginger ale or iced tea, crunching baked french fries, tater tots or chips - basically feasting however you like - you can laugh at anyone who thinks acan't be vegan. How-to video added Oct 2014!..came and went just as it usually does. A nice meal, warm fuzzy feelings, flowers and chocolate. For our VDay meal we dined out atin Santa Monica. They had a special menu that I simply couldn't pass up. Everything was delish. But the highlight of the meal for me: plump little balls of "goat cheese" - vegan of course...-RFD menuThey were 'almond crusted' a slight smokiness to them. They were perched atop a light green salad. Some beets on the side and shallot dressing. When you smashed the side of your fork into these balls they burst open to reveal a tender silky interior. They were amazing. I need the recipe!How was your VDay? Any disasters or wonderful moments to report?And those tender crispy balls from RFD really inspired me to post one of my favorite easy veggie burger recipes.I woke up. Munched some blueberries. Played with the cat. And worked on this post as drizzly raindrops poured outside my window. Blustery trees swaying all morning and well into the evening.You simply take a baked sweet potato, some soft canned beans (I used cannellini white beans) add in a few accents, mash, saute and serve. You can also bake for a healthier preparation. And you could add in other whole food ingredients too like brown rice, finely chopped apple, hemp seeds - whatever! The sweet potato is such a nice binder - you can really getif you choose.I pan-fry. More of a saute really. I use virgin coconut oil or safflower oil.And I don't think I have to remind you how incrediblysweet potatoes and beans are. Filled with good stuff. Vitamins, minerals, fiber, protein.The Patty.I served the patties with tender sliced avocado, a crisp bed of romaine lettuce, a circle of onion, some Dijon mustard and some pepper and olive oil over top.The ABOVE recipe is the one I use at least once every few weeks. It is an easy and delicious version. BELOW I provide a shot of the older recipe since there were a few comments from people about when I changed the recipe. I updated the recipe based on the one I currently make on a routine basis. As always, you can add spices like cajun and nooch to the patty as you'd like. So in case you are curious, below is theIf you loved that recipe, please check out my book / wellness guidefrom Penguin / Avery - details here.