Information On Leo Astrology

Leo Zodiac Sign Leo Horoscope

Element: Fire

Quality: Fixed

Color: Gold, Yellow, Orange

Day: Sunday

Ruler: Sun

Greatest Overall Compatibility: Aquarius, Gemini

Lucky Numbers: 1, 3, 10, 19

Date range: July 23 - August 22

Leo traits

Strengths: Creative, passionate, generous, warm-hearted, cheerful, humorous

Weaknesses: Arrogant, stubborn, self-centered, lazy, inflexible

Leo likes: Theater, taking holidays, being admired, expensive things, bright colors, fun with friends

Leo dislikes: Being ignored, facing difficult reality, not being treated like a king or queen

People born under the sign of Leo are natural born leaders. They are dramatic, creative, self-confident, dominant and extremely difficult to resist, able to achieve anything they want to in any area of life they commit to. There is a specific strength to a Leo and their "king of the jungle" status. Leo often has many friends for they are generous and loyal. Self-confident and attractive, this is a Sun sign capable of uniting different groups of people and leading them as one towards a shared cause, and their healthy sense of humor makes collaboration with other people even easier.

Leo belongs to the element of Fire, just like Aries and Sagittarius. This makes them warmhearted, in love with life, trying to laugh and have a good time. Able to use their mind to solve even the most difficult problems, they will easily take initiative in resolving various complicated situations. Ruled by the Sun, Leo worships this fiery entity in the sky, quite literally as well as metaphorically. They are in search for self-awareness and in constant growth of ego. Aware of their desires and personality, they can easily ask for everything they need, but could just as easily unconsciously neglect the needs of other people in their chase for personal gain or status. When a Leo representative becomes too fond and attached to their achievements and the way other people see them, they become an easy target, ready to be taken down.

Leo - the Lion in the Cave The story of the Lion always speaks of bravery. This is an animal fearless and impossible to challenge, hurt or destroy, their only weaknesses being fear and aggression towards those they confront. Living in a cave, a Lion always needs to have one, nesting and finding comfort in hard times. However, they should never stay there for long. With their head high, they have to face others with dignity and respect, never raising a voice, a hand, or a weapon, bravely walking through the forest they rule.

Yesterday Today This Week This Month More Horoscopes Leo Horoscope: Yesterday AIDS has been traced to 1908, even though most people only became aware of it in the 1980s. You might choose to do something dangerous because you aren’t aware of all possible realities and consequences, so try to get well-informed ... Continue to Leo Yesterday Horoscope Leo Horoscope: Today What you expect from people working for you seems to be impossible to get. Be reasonable and realize that not everyone is ready to meet your needs and expectations, especially if they are burdened with too many problems in their ... Continue to Leo Daily Horoscope Leo Horoscope: This Week If you have been overburdened by presence of too many people lately, you will feel much better being left alone for a while. You need to recharge your batteries and do something about all those things you once begun but ... Continue to Leo Weeky Horoscope Leo Horoscope: This Month Too much work will take away too much of the energy you have gathered in August. Try to stay rational in the professional field and do what needs to get done with vigor and faith, but leaving enough time for ... Continue to Leo Monthly Horoscope

Leo Love and Sex

This Fire sign is passionate and sincere and its representatives show their feelings with ease and clarity. When in love, they are fun, loyal, respectful and very generous towards their loved one. They will take the role of a leader in any relationship, and strongly rely on their need for independency and initiative. This can be tiring for their partner at times, especially if they start imposing their will and organizing things that aren't theirs to organize in the first place. Each Leo needs a partner who is self-aware, reasonable and on the same intellectual level as them. Their partner also has to feel free to express and fight for themselves, or too much light from their Leo's Sun might burn their own personality down.

Sex life of each Leo is an adventure, fun and very energetic. This is someone who has a clear understanding of boundaries between sex and love, but might fail to see how important intimacy and emotional connection is to the quality of their sex life. Every Leo needs a partner to fight through their awareness and reach their sensitive, subconscious core, in order to find true satisfaction in a meaningful relationship. Create a match below to find out more, how Leo matches with other signs:

Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces + Aries Taurus Gemini Cancer Leo Virgo Libra Scorpio Sagittarius Capricorn Aquarius Pisces Match

Leo Friends and Family

Friends - Leo is generous, faithful and a truly loyal friend, born with a certain dignity and commitment to individual values. Born with a need to help others, they will do so even if it takes a lot time and energy. Strong and reliable, this individual has the ability to appeal to almost everyone and has the energy to host celebrations and different events with people that bring out the best in them. They are rarely alone, for interactions with others give them the sense of self-esteem and awareness they need, but could have trouble finding friends able to keep pace and follow the high energy they carry everywhere they go.

Family - Family matters won't be the first thing Leo will think about when they wake up in the morning or lie to bed at night. Turned to themselves for the most part, they tend to become independent as soon as possible. Still, a Leo will do anything to protect their loved ones, proud of their ancestry and roots in good and bad times.

Leo Career and Money

Leos are highly energetic and tend to always be busy, no matter the need for their employment. They are ambitious, creative and optimistic and once they dedicate to their work, they will do everything just right. The best possible situation they can find themselves in is to be their own bosses or manage others with as little control from their superiors as possible. Jobs that allow open expression of artistic talent, such as acting and entertainment, are ideal for a Leo. Management, education and politics are also a good fit, as well as anything that puts them in a leadership position which naturally suits them.

Leos love to be surrounded by modern and trendy things, and although money comes easy to them, they spend it less responsibly than some other signs of the zodiac. Extremely generous, they could provide many friends with financial help, supporting them through bad times. Although this doesn't always prove to be wise, it always makes them feel good.

How to Attract the Leo Man

A Leo man wants to be treated like a king in their intimate relationship and this is not their narcissistic characteristic, but a true inner need that all people with deep self-respect have to feel. Plans with him are always big and dramatic, and showering with admiration, devotion and attention come really natural both ways. This is a man who gives many gifts when they are in love, often expensive and posing as a statement of his effort. Any partner that wants to stay with him has to prove that they are worthy of royal treatment and ready to give enough of it back. A Leo man will love compliments, and although he appears confident, he needs a lot of praise to start feeling safe around their loved one too.

However romantic and passionate, this man will rarely choose a woman that doesn't "go well" with his appearance, or doesn't make him look good in the eyes of specific groups in the outer world. He is known to easily take the roll of an eternal bachelor, always on the hunt and celebrating love and life. He will put himself in the center of attention, and his partner could compete with a number of admirers, but their relationship is not in danger for as long as he is adored the way he loves to be. When treated right, he will stick around forever.

How to Attract the Leo Woman

Leo women are very warm-hearted and driven by the desire to be loved and admired, and as all people born under the Leo zodiac sign, love to be in the limelight. To seduce her, one has to treat her well, respect her, compliment her and see her fit to live a luxurious lifestyle she deserves. She appreciates romantic partners and will expect to be the center of someone's world, giving the person she loves the same royal treatment. Dating a Leo woman requires acceptance of her flaws and admiration for her qualities. She doesn't like competing for love and wants to have clarity on her role in her partner's life.

A woman born under the Sun sign of Leo will always enjoy a visit to a theater, an art museum or a fancy restaurant. She wants to be showered with flowers and gifts, but as grandiose displays of affection rather than an expensive routine of her partner. She can be a bit domineering and needs to stay in control of her own life. If her partner holds her as valued and queen-like as she is, there is infinite warmth, care, and attention in her heart to respond.

Compatible Signs Leo Should Consider: Aries, Gemini, Libra, Sagittarius