Think for a moment about the very phrase “national pastime” now, in 2013. What sorts of images does it conjure? “It sounds like a guy sitting on a rocking chair on his porch listening to a game on the radio and maybe he’s whittling,” says Bob Costas of NBC.

Photo

As crazy as it sounds, baseball was once celebrated for its speed. Into the 1910s — before all of the commercial breaks and visits to the mound — it was possible to play a game in under an hour, says the author Kevin Baker, who is writing a history of baseball in New York City.

To the game’s early poets, baseball’s fast pace was what made it distinctly American. Mark Twain called it a symbol of “the drive and push and rush and struggle of the raging, tearing, booming 19th century!” The 21st century, not so much.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Paradoxically, baseball’s decline began at the very moment we think of as its golden age, the 1950s and ’60s. The game held the country’s almost undivided attention. Baseball’s heroes were America’s heroes. Yet the forces that would undermine the game’s cultural supremacy had already been set in motion.

FOR all the pastoral gloss we like to smear on baseball — hey, is that Shoeless Joe emerging from those cornfields? — it was historically an urban game. The national pastime first took hold not in small-town America but in the industrial Northeast, which had the density of population to fill stadiums. Before the 1950s, baseball had 16 franchises in 10 cities, not one of them west or south of St. Louis.

But the same highways that led Americans south and west also pushed professional baseball into new territory: between 1961 and 1998, the number of franchises almost doubled.

You might think that spreading baseball across the country would be good for the game, and in some ways it was: more franchises equaled more spectators. In the process, though, a lot of teams wound up in cities without deep roots in the game.

This could be problematic for any sport, let alone one as obsessed with its history as baseball. Witness awkward spectacles like “Turn Back the Clock Night” at Tropicana Field, the Tampa Bay Rays’ annual attempt to whip up interest among its putative fan base. (How does a franchise that sprang to life during the Clinton administration go retro? By wearing the old uniforms of other teams, of course!)

Baseball’s never-ending nostalgia trip has made it an inherently conservative sport, one that’s forever straining to live up to its own mythology. This year, not a single contemporary player was voted into the Hall of Fame because so many eligible players were suspected of steroid use. Never mind that Cooperstown has its share of racists, wife beaters and even a drug dealer. (To say nothing of the spitballers.)

Expansion also helped ensure that baseball would become a largely regional sport. Economically, this has been great: local TV deals are where the money is. It’s been good for fans, too: They can now watch their hometown team play most of its games.

The downside is that only a handful of franchises can claim any sort of national profile. When the postseason rolls around and it’s time for baseball to take the national stage — well, it doesn’t, unless the Yankees or the Red Sox are involved. “If Tampa Bay plays Cincinnati in the World Series, I don’t care if the series goes seven games and every game goes into extra innings, baseball is screwed,” says Mr. Costas. “That’s not fair to the Rays or the Reds, but it’s true.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It doesn’t help that the postseason starts in early October, which means it’s going up against a new season of TV shows and — yes — football.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

You can’t talk about the decline of baseball without also talking about the parallel rise of the N.F.L. We’re a sports-crazed culture, gorging on the all-you-can-watch buffet of ESPN, fantasy leagues and video games. But even the 24-hour sports cycle lasts only 24 hours. Decisions must be made, and they invariably favor football. Not only is “Madden NFL 25” America’s hottest sports video game; fantasy football has far surpassed fantasy baseball in popularity.

The N.F.L. has certain structural advantages over Major League Baseball: teams play only once a week, and when the postseason arrives, every game is an elimination game. But its real advantage is that it’s louder, faster and more violent — which is to say, better in tune with our cultural moment. “We are a shouting culture now, shouting connotes excitement and engenders excitement,” says Daniel Okrent, who is considered the founding father of fantasy baseball. “Baseball is quiet and slow.”

It’s telling that professional football has been around for about 100 years, but that it didn’t find cultural traction until the age of television.

If baseball was a game you followed, football was one you watched. Beneath the surface, it was an enormously complicated sport. But the passing, the running, the tackling? This was great television. And under the lights, on Monday nights, with Howard Cosell making you feel like the country’s fate hung in the balance of even the most meaningless game? Forget about it.

It’s almost impossible to overstate the role that TV has played in determining our taste in sports. College football took off after a 1984 Supreme Court decision that allowed the networks to flood the market with college games. The N.C.A.A. basketball tournament has been around for 75 years, but it was CBS’s “March Madness” that made it a cultural phenomenon. Now even the president fills out a tournament bracket.

THE increasing interest in college football and basketball fed the increasing interest in the two pro sports. Both the N.F.L. and the N.B.A. drafts are now mega-TV events. And the baseball draft? You can follow along on the MLB Network. Chances are you won’t recognize a single name.

Why has college baseball failed to attract any meaningful interest? Mostly because there are already so many professional baseball games to watch. Or not watch. (Earlier this month, an Astros game had a .04 Nielsen rating in the Houston area, which translates to about 1,000 viewers.)

Baseball’s ubiquity was once its great advantage. With its 162-game season, it was the default sport; there was always a baseball game on. There still is, it’s just that now there are so many alternatives. And not just live games; you have SportsCenter and its countless highlight-aggregating imitators, too.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Sports are now as much a part of our popular culture as movies, TV shows or pop music. Athletes aren’t icons, they’re celebrities, and are marketed accordingly, which explains why there’s a course at Harvard Business School that studies LeBron James.

Yet for the most part, baseball stars haven’t really managed to transcend their local markets. To some extent, this is a byproduct of the steroid era; baseball’s zealous pursuit of juicers has torn down a lot of legends in the making. It’s also the nature of the game, which doesn’t lend itself as easily to superstardom as basketball. (Imagine LeBron going 3-for-4 and having that be considered a memorable performance.)

But baseball has also failed to sell its young stars to the broader public. There may be a wariness to do so, a sense that “branding” is undignified for our national pastime. It doesn’t help that the game has no pop-culture ambassadors to speak of — no Lil Wayne or Jay-Z. Look at the audience of an average N.B.A. postseason game and you’ll find a gallery of familiar faces; look at one of baseball’s, and you’ll find the strategically placed stars of the latest Fox sitcom.

Much has been made of the declining participation of African-Americans in baseball. Less has been said about the trickle-down effects of this in an era when hip-hop is such a powerful tastemaker in American culture. Baseball is not cool.

Can it be again? By all means. Sports rise and fall in cultural relevance. Football reigns supreme now, but given everything we are learning about its dangers, that could change. People are moving back into cities, which could work to baseball’s benefit, too. Also, the Chicago Cubs will presumably make it to the World Series again someday. People will want to see that.

For that matter, it’s fair to wonder how golden baseball’s golden age really was — and how much our perception of that era is just a function of baby-boomer nostalgia. After all, when Roger Maris hit his 61st home run on Oct. 1, 1961, Yankee Stadium wasn’t even half full. “I don’t think the game is fading,” says Will Leitch, a senior writer for Sports on Earth. “I think the notion of what the game is supposed to stand for is fading.”

That may prove to be a good thing for baseball. Maybe a new generation of fans won’t grow up thinking the game represents something more than it is. Maybe baseball will stop auditioning for another chapter in the Ken Burns saga. Maybe baseball can just be baseball. Yes, it’s quiet and slow, but if you hang in there, through all of the pitching changes and batting-glove adjustments, you might get caught up in the drama. If you don’t, there’s plenty else to watch.