Photo by Jo.

Hello, and welcome back to What’s Cooking?, the open thread where you get to share your brilliant thoughts, advice, recipes, and opinions on all things food-related. Today I want to talk about the glorious three-day weekend we just had, specifically what you ate during it.

Long weekends are always perfect for embarking on new and exciting culinary projects, or just hanging out and grilling while drinking many beers. Whatever you ended up cooking and consuming, I want to hear about it. A few questions to get you going:

Did you grill anything? I don’t have any real access to a grill, so I have to live vicariously through you.

I don’t have any real access to a grill, so I have to live vicariously through you. Did you embark upon any new and exciting projects? How did they turn out? After being paralyzed by too many great recipes, I finally made brownies from Stella Parks’ amazing new cookbook, BraveTart: Iconic American Desserts. I am a long-time fan of box mix brownies, but these fudgy masterpieces have made me a convert, heart and soul.

After being paralyzed by too many great recipes, I finally made brownies from Stella Parks’ amazing new cookbook, BraveTart: Iconic American Desserts. I am a long-time fan of box mix brownies, but these fudgy masterpieces have made me a convert, heart and soul. What was the beverage situation this weekend? Did you try any new cocktails? It’s not exactly new, but I did rekindle my love for Cynar, and have been sipping this spritz all weekend long.

It’s not exactly new, but I did rekindle my love for Cynar, and have been sipping this spritz all weekend long. Did you attend any fun picnics or potlucks? Who brought the best dish? I was not invited to any such affairs, but I did attend a birthday party. I brought the aforementioned brownies, and they were very much enjoyed.

I was not invited to any such affairs, but I did attend a birthday party. I brought the aforementioned brownies, and they were very much enjoyed. If you ventured into the great outdoors: what kind of picnic did you pack? I went for a dip in the Washougal river, but failed to bring much more than chips and Diet Coke. Last week though, I went to the river and brought chicken salad sandwiches and jars of banana pudding, and that was pretty ace.

Also, if you just stayed home and chilled and ate takeout, I want to hear about that too. I started the weekend with a giant sausage and mushroom pizza, and it was a good choice.