Sometimes when decorating for a small home, the details carry a lot of style “weight”… In other words, make it count, because you only have so much space for special stuff! (Not to mention, in a small space everything has more attention placed onto it…) Pottery Barn is one of those stores we all love, but it isn’t always the most affordable, or convenient option. Plus, it’s always fun to DIY! We have our favorite DIY Pottery Barn Knock Off projects for you, with some perfect accessories and decor for your small home.

Our feature project above, is a Pottery Barn Knock Off DIY console table, by ‘East Coast Creative’. I love this look, a little rustic, a little sophisticated.

This Pottery Barn Knock Off painted numbers canvas by ‘Pink Paisley Polka Dots’ looks exactly like the real thing! This would be a great focal point for a small room with it’s graphic nature to add structure, but a modern twist on a rustic surface… Love it!

These Pottery Barn Knock Off lockers by ‘Chalkboard and Blue’ are amazing! Can you imagine using these to corral the clutter? Perfect for a small space!

This glass bottle lamp is a DIY Pottery Barn Knock Off by ‘The Concrete Cottage’… Made from old lamp parts and a glass bottle from Michaels, she made this for a fraction of what it retails for! Good tutorial!

These Pottery Barn Knock Off wood and canvas crates are great for organizing and keeping things neat…also a plus in a small space! By ‘Thrifty and Chic’, I love this project…

The holidays are always “just around the corner”, and this year, make this PB inspired Peace sign for just $14 like ‘It’s Always Autumn’ did! Good step by step for this easy project.

From ‘One Krieger Chick’, this PB inspired pool sign doesn’t just have to be for the pool! This would make a great novelty sign art piece without the hooks as well…

If you are like me and are always looking for filler for your bowls, vases and jars… try these Pottery Barn inspired decorative balls by V and Co… Simple, easy, inexpensive!

LOVE this Pottery Barn inspired clock tutorial by ‘Me and My DIY’! What a great focal point to make for your room…

We have another PB inspired lamp project and tutorial for you from Gina at ‘The Shabby Creek Cottage’. I especially love the shade! She made this lamp for $10! Nice!

Finally, from ‘Home Stories A to Z’, this PB knock off Noel sign has an easy tutorial, complete with showing you how to get that look of wood grain on the letters… Pretty for the holidays!