



Last Update October 5th, 2016. Decorating your home can sometimes become a daunting task because you can get lost in measurements, styles and other decor choices. Then you can either begin researching your problem online and experimenting or getting help from a professional designer.

To avoid all that hustle, here are 20 home decor cheat sheets for you that you can keep handy to turn to whenever you face a decor problem. These cheat sheets and guidelines will put the most common home decor rules in simple terms, which will help you decorate your home almost like a real interior design professional.

This article is sponsored by:







Area Rug Size

Choose the right size of the area rug before buying one. Make sure it fits your furniture perfectly.

Home Lighting

Use this guide to choose the correct lighting for your home.

Decor Style

Feeling a bit lost in the world of interior design styles? Use this guide as a map to the most popular design styles.

Measuring

This cheat sheet provides the most common home measurements and takes out all the guesswork.





Decorate the Space Above Sofa

Make sure the space above sofa isn’t left blank by using these wall art hanging guidelines.

Gallery Wall Layouts

Creating a gallery wall that looks good is not easy, so here’s a diagram that will help you in many different situations.

The article continues below... Check Out Our Today’s Top Posts











Decorate a Mantel

A mantel is the perfect surface for display items and vignettes but when you begin arranging multiple things it can be a challenge to make it look right. Use this diagram as a reference.

Living Room Layout

Having trouble arranging living room furniture? These layouts will help.

Gallery Placement

Creating a picture gallery in different places has its quirks. Refer to this diagram for ideas.

Window Coverings

Take a look at this drawing before deciding on your window coverings – there are a lot more of them that you might have imagined.

Choosing Colors

The choice of colors is a complicated subject but this diagram will help you choose the main colors for different rooms based on their psychology.

Choosing Indoor Houseplants

We’ve already talked about keeping houseplants alive, and the first step is choosing the right plants. Refer to this diagram for the most common houseplants.

Feng Shui

Following the principles of Feng Shui in home decor can be a daunting task, but this diagram will make the process a lot easier.

Styling Sectionals

You didn’t think you can just throw pillows randomly, did you?

Print Size Guide

Here’s a quick guide to determine the print size for a typical setup.

Choose the Right Rug

Never make a mistake of choosing the wrong rug for different rooms again.

Bed Make Up

This diagram shows the correct way to make your bed.

Basic Vignette Layout

Vignettes make great accents and here’s how you can make a basic one.

Hanging Curtains

One of the biggest home decor mistakes made is with hanging the curtains. Refer to this drawing to never hang them at an incorrect height again.

Sofa Styling

Create a sofa style like a real interior designer.

Pin this article for later: