Like lasagna, a good soup and a decadent chocolate cake, a go-to salad dressing should be something you can whip up at a moment’s notice. And once you’ve tested out a couple of the following recipes, you’ll wonder why you ever bothered buying salad dressing at the store in the first place. DIY dressing is cheaper, tastier, prime for packing in those cute vessels you collect and always at the ready as a gift for friends. Basically, these 12 recipes are about to change your life.

1. Green Goddess: It’s like eating a salad… on your salad. This one gets the prize for packing in the most nutrients, designed to keep your skin, hair and nails healthy and glowing! (via Mind Body Green)

2. Balsamic Almond and Turmeric Salad Dressing: Because — balsamic, almond and turmeric are all in the same recipe. (via Healthy Food. Healthy LIving)

3. Easy One-Jar Lemon Salad Dressing: Six ingredients and one jar are all you need. You can whip up this combo before you even have time to think about going to the store and grabbing some dressing for tonight’s salad. (via The Fitchen)

4. Fresh Springtime Herb Dressing: Spring has sprung and with it are lots of yummy herbs to choose from. This dressing uses dill and parsley to dress it up. Well played! (via Chef Savvy)

5. Miso Sesame Ginger: The possibilities are endless. Use it as a marinade, slather it on your next stir-fry or drizzle it on a big green salad. Whatever you put it on is sure to be packed with flavor. (via Bowl of Delicious)

6. Sweet Basil Dressing: We’re crushing on anything and everything that’s packing fresh basil and coconut water in the same recipe. (via Nutrition Stripped)

7. Celery Ranch Dressing: This is the most creative spin on Ranch dressing maybe ever. Celery and coconut milk give it that tangy, creamy combo that Ranch dressing is gobbled up for. (via Spa Bettie)

8. Creamy Habanero Dressing: Here’s a super easy dressing that packs a punch. Habanero peppers bring the heat, while creamy cashew keeps it cool. It’s a roller coaster of temperatures, and we love it. (via The Healthy Family and Home)

9. Cilantro Jalapeño Vinaigrette: The love child of jalapeños, cilantro and lime tastes so good. This will remind your taste buds that summer is indeed on the horizon. (via CaliZona)

10. French Dressing: French dressing might be old school but this old standby deserves a shoutout. Serve it at your next dinner party, and watch your friends travel back in time with this throwback. (via Hidden Fruits and Veggies)

11. Classic French Balsamic Vinaigrette: The mothership of all dressings. If there is one dressing recipe you memorize, this is the one. (via Chin Deep)

12. Creamy Avocado Dressing: Let us be the first to say, there is no way you can go wrong with creamy avocado dressing. (via Simply Scratch)

There you have it! Bounce over to the comments and tell us which dressing is speaking to you!