Each winter, skiers and snowboarders are faced with the same dilemma: Where should they ski this year? For the lucky few who live near great skiing, a season pass and a few tanks of gas may suffice. But for much of the country, a ski vacation requires a hefty investment and hours of travel.

To ensure that you’re getting the most out of ski season, we’ve rounded up the 10 best ski towns you should visit this winter. Iconic destinations—like Aspen and Whistler—made the cut because they offer reliable conditions and walkable towns. But our picks also prioritize other factors, like which resorts are opening new chairlifts, debuting new on-mountain amenities, or have big upcoming events.

To make things even easier, we’ve included a favorite hotel for each ski destination, because nothing tops off skiing quite like a hot tub and a comfy bed. Upset that your favorite spot didn’t make the list? Let us know in the comments what we’re missing and why you love it.

Head to Aspen, Colorado...

Aspen always delivers an epic ski vacation, but this winter the town will make headlines in March as the host of the 2017 Audi FIS World Cup Finals. It’s the first time in 20 years that the competition will be held in the United States, and the best ski racers in the world will attend.

Beyond this major event, Aspen offers up skiing at four different resorts: the kid-friendly Buttermilk, the steep and in-town Aspen Mountain, the nearly always awesome Highlands, and a large ski area with something for everyone, Snowmass. Families will love the Aspen Snowmass ski program (held at Buttermilk and Snowmass), while hard-core skiers just can’t get enough of the ski resort’s diverse terrain.

It’s truly hard to have a bad time in Aspen, where you can also check out the amazing—and free—Aspen Art Museum, listen to seriously good music at Belly Up, have a chicken sandwich at White House Tavern, or a drink at the historic Hotel Jerome. And don’t miss après ski at Ajax Tavern (located at the bottom of Aspen Mountain).

And stay at the Little Nell:

As one of the best luxury hotels in the state of Colorado, a stay at the Little Nell won’t come cheap, but it always impresses. With an in-town, slopeside location on Aspen Mountain, you’re just steps away from the Silver Queen Gondola and the hotel boasts an indulgent year-round pool and spa. Guests can also sign up for the complimentary First Tracks program, which will allow skiers to board the gondola at 8:15 am and get access to groomed corduroy or fresh powder 45 minutes before the public.

Head to Sun Valley, Idaho...

A longtime playground of America’s celebrities, Sun Valley has received some big overhauls lately. In addition to the recent renovation of the Sun Valley Lodge, this winter the Aspen Skiing Company-owned Limelight Hotel Ketchum will open with 99 hotel rooms, 14 for-sale condominiums, a restaurant, and a lobby lounge. It’ll offer much-needed upscale Ketchum lodging, all steps away from the city’s thriving art scene, delicious food at restaurants like Rickshaw and Cristina’s, and a pleasant, walkable downtown.

There are two hills at Sun Valley Resort, the beginner-oriented and family-friendly Dollar Mountain—home to the world’s very first chairlift—and the much larger Bald Mountain. While Sun Valley is famous for incredible groomers, no lines, and sunny skies, if you catch snow at Bald Mountain, prepare to be impressed. This isn’t the steepest mountain you’ll ever ski, but sustained pitches and fun trees make a 10-inch powder day loads of fun.

And stay at the Sun Valley Lodge:

Although this 80-year-old property still boasts the historic charm that has made it a top ski destination for decades, the Sun Valley Lodge’s recent renovation added larger rooms, fireplaces, and a 20,000-square-foot spa. The Lodge also boasts a retro bowling alley, plentiful on-site dining options, ice skating, and multiple pools. For families, it doesn’t get much better than this.

Head to Telluride, Colorado...

It’s easier than ever to get to this remote ski town in Colorado, which is good because Telluride might have the most gorgeous scenery of any ski area in the country. Great Lakes Airlines will fly direct into Telluride Regional Airport from Denver International Airport, and there is also increased flight service into Montrose/Telluride Airport from destinations across the country (head over here for more).

Once you’re in Telluride, you’ll find a gorgeous and walkable downtown area with easy access to the ski area. Telluride’s free gondola, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year, connects the historic town to the ski area’s Mountain Village up above. Experts will love hiking Telluride’s Gold Hill Chutes or Palmyra Peak, and there’s plenty of well-groomed blue runs for families. After skiing, don’t miss the Detroit-style pizza at Brown Dog Pizza and the Thai food at Siam.

And stay at the Lumiere:

This boutique ski-in/ski-out property in Telluride’s Mountain Village is conveniently located near the town gondola and offers 11 hotel rooms and 18 guest residences. The ski concierge is convenient, the rooms are large, and the resort gets high marks for small luxurious touches, like the steam showers that transport you to water nirvana.

Head to Jackson Hole, Wyoming...

Wyoming’s most famous ski town is always a good choice for skiing, but this winter visitors will be able to take advantage of the newly built, 8-person Sweetwater Gondola. Replacing the outdated Sweetwater Triple, the new gondola rises 1,276 vertical feet, transports up to 2,000 people per hour, provides access to plentiful intermediate terrain, and should also help reduce lines on the resort’s iconic tram.

On top of the new gondola, visitors to Jackson Hole Mountain Resort will get some of the best (read: steep) expert terrain in the country, ample snowfall, and amazing views of the Tetons. But Jackson Hole also delivers on an excellent beginner ski school and plentiful lodging options located right at the base. Take a 15-minute drive from the ski area into downtown Jackson and you’ll find a walkable downtown with lots of shops and restaurants (don’t miss Persephone Bakery for breakfast and Bin 22 for dinner).

And stay at the Four Seasons Jackson Hole:

The ski-in/ski-out location of Four Seasons Jackson Hole is one of the best in ski country, but the top-notch service at the hotel makes it worth a splurge. Well-appointed rooms, a gorgeous pool and hot tub area, loads of family-friendly amenities, and excellent dining options—at both the steak-centric Westbank Grill and the more casual Handle Bar—mean that this hotel sets the standard for slopeside lodging.

Head to Vail, Colorado...

With over 3 feet of snow in the past week, conditions are the best they have been all season! #vailsnow : @benkoelkerphoto A photo posted by Vail Mountain (@vailmtn) on Jan 21, 2016 at 3:38pm PST

As one of the most famous ski destinations in the world, Vail offers something for everyone. Non-skiers will like walking around the base village, kids can take advantage of the well-organized ski school and creative playgrounds, and an array of dining and lodging options mean that there’s always plenty to choose from. Check out Vendettas for casual pizza or Mountain Standard for a more traditional post-skiing dinner.

Long-time skiers of Vail will know that the Sun Up lift—also called chair 17—in the resort’s back bowls has been a bottleneck for years. This season Vail is replacing the Sun Up lift with a detachable high-speed quad, making it easier to lap the bowls, reduce lift lines, and get back to Blue Sky quickly. Sure, the ski area can get crowded at times, but if you catch first chair and ski hard, there are plenty of runs to be had.

And stay at the Sebastian:

Ideally located in Vail Village, The Sebastian is an 84-room boutique hotel that’s a top choice for lodging in the valley. There’s an on-site spa, slopeside ski valet service at the Sebastian Base Camp at the foot of Vail Mountain, and well-appointed rooms and suites suitable for couples and families alike. Throw in the gorgeous pool, hot tub, and the multi-million dollar collection of artwork and you’ve got a destination that goes way beyond Vail’s reputation for faux Bavarian schtick.

Head to Snowbird, Utah...

"When is the Tram opening?" TOMORROW AT NOON with skiing/riding down Regulator Johnson. Come out and shred the most open vertical in the USA! # ( by #MattCrawley) A photo posted by Snowbird (@snowbird) on Nov 29, 2016 at 12:19pm PST

Snowbird Ski Resort has been making headlines lately, opening a new 23,000-square-foot lodge at the top of Hidden Peak in 2015 as part of the resort's recent $35 million capital investment project. And the gorgeous mountain-top building provides views of just what makes this Utah ski area so special: namely, the 2,500 acres of diverse terrain that sees an annual average of 500 inches of snow.

That snow is light and dry, and expert skiers will have a field day with the resort’s 3,240-foot vertical drop. But the best part of Snowbird—beyond the awesome skiing—might just be the ease of access. It takes 40 minutes to get to the ski area from Salt Lake City, where cheap flights and even international connections abound. Trust us, Snowbird is a must ski.

And stay at the Cliff Lodge:

Recently renovated in 2015, the Cliff Lodge is a classic and should be on any skier’s bucket list. Sure, the huge concrete profile may look a bit imposing compared to the faux-Swiss look of some ski towns, but the ski-in/ski-out location and amazing views more than make up for it. The Cliff Lodge also offers a heated outdoor pool, hot tubs, and the best spa in the Cottonwood Canyons.

Head to Steamboat, Colorado...

Ski Magazine ranked Steamboat Resort #7 Best In The West @skimagazine #SteamboatResort A photo posted by Steamboat Resort (@steamboatresort) on Sep 29, 2016 at 1:54pm PDT

With sunny days, a lively concert schedule throughout the winter, and some of the best tree skiing in the state, Steamboat offers a good option for skiers looking for Colorado snow without the crowds of the I-70 resorts. New this winter, Ski Town U.S.A. has replaced the Elkhead Chairlift with a high-speed quad, making it faster and easier to get around the mountain.

Families will also feel at home at Steamboat. The learn-to-ski and snowboard programs boast accomplished instructors and younger kiddos can take advantage of the on-site daycare. After a day on the hill, head into the town of Steamboat Springs for a dip in the hot springs—we love both the more remote Strawberry Park Natural Hot Springs and the family-friendly Old Town Hot Springs in downtown—and an upscale meal at Laundry Restaurant.

And stay at a Moving Mountains ski chalet:

Although the Steamboat Grand has a nice location at the base village, Steamboat just doesn’t have the same number of high-quality hotel accommodations as other ski towns. So take a page out of the European ski book and opt for a catered ski chalet with Moving Mountains. With an array of homes and condos available for rent—many of them ski-in/ski-out—Moving Mountains offers an in-house chef, concierge services, and five-star amenities. Head over here for more info.

Head to Stowe, Vermont...

As one of New England’s favorite ski towns, Stowe offers fine dining, plush digs, and plenty of turns. It’s also one of the northeast’s most picturesque ski destinations, with a European vibe, an iconic—and very Instagrammable—church steeple, and lovely views of Stowe Mountain.

The skiing is an intermediate’s dream, with plenty of blue cruisers, but experts will still find fun, challenging runs like Ridgeview and National. Don’t miss the Cliff House restaurant at the top of the Gondola for great views and hit up Piecasso Pizzeria in town for on-point Italian.

New for this winter, Stowe Mountain Resort is also opening the $80 million Adventure Center. Home to the ski area’s children’s programs and located at Spruce Peak, the Adventure Center will provide daycare facilities as well as learn-to-ski programs for kids 3 and up.

And stay at the Field Guide:

This recently-opened 30-room boutique property is a short walk from downtown Stowe and only a 15-minute drive from the ski area. It features beautifully designed interiors, and offers extra touches like complimentary breakfast baskets delivered each morning and a well-reviewed restaurant—Picnic Social—on site.

Head to Whistler, British Columbia...

Earlier in the summer, Whistler made the biggest ski headlines of the year when Vail Resorts bought the Canadian resort—the biggest in North America—for $1.3 billion. This year, skiers and snowboarders with the wildly popular Vail Resorts Epic Pass also get 5 days at Whistler, and holders of the Mountain Collective Pass can take advantage of 2 free days at Whistler.

Families will love the $2.4 million in upgrades that Whistler spent on its learning areas this season. But what makes Whistler the go-to Canadian ski destination is the incredible variety of terrain and the lively base village. Don’t miss happy hour at the Garibaldi Lift Co—conveniently located next to the Whistler Village Gondola—and a blow-out dinner at Bearfoot Bistro, where champagne sabering and an all-ice vodka room are part of the fun.

And stay at the Fairmont Chateau Whistler Resort:

With an ideal location at the base of Blackcomb mountain, the Fairmount offers luxurious digs with a hopping bar scene in the Mallard Lounge, and delicious (albeit a bit pricey) breakfasts at the Wildflower restaurant. If you can swing it, upgrade to Fairmont Gold so you have access to the complimentary continental breakfast, honor bar, and afternoon snacks. We also love the outdoor heated lap pool (complete with underwater music) and the many hot tubs that are sure to warm you up after a day of skiing.

Head to Taos, New Mexico...

Who else is looking forward to more perfect days like this? Slopes open in less than 30 days! #kachinapeak #bluebird #daydreaming #skitaos A photo posted by Taos Ski Valley (@skitaos) on Oct 25, 2016 at 9:27am PDT

This iconic ski area in New Mexico is in the midst of a multi-year transformation, with massive investments in both on-mountain amenities (like the Kachina Peak lift, which opened in 2015-2016) and base area improvements. You’ll find some of the best steeps in the country, but even if you don’t catch Taos Ski Valley during one of its infamous storm cycles, the artsy town of Taos and the nearby Taos Pueblo are worth a stop.

After skiing all day, have a beer at the Bavarian where skiers bask in the sun on the deck and hungry diners indulge in spätzle or Swiss fondue at night. Or head into Taos for amazing New Mexican food—try Orlando’s—and great beer and music at Taos Mesa Brewing.

And stay at the Blake Hotel:

The Blake is looking great with a fresh coat of white! ❄️❄️ #snow #theblake #winterwonderland A photo posted by The Blake at Taos Ski Valley (@theblakeattsv) on Nov 22, 2016 at 11:14am PST

This 80-room alpine hotel adjacent to Taos Ski Valley’s Lift 1 will open on February 1, 2017 and will finally offer top-notch lodging in the base village. The new hotel is the centerpiece of the renovated village and cost $60 million to build.