The art of pottery is oftentimes described as therapeutic and relaxing. While spinning clay, your mind and body are in natural synergy, wrapped around your creative ambitions and goals. This thoughtful, artistic activity can open up the mind and relieve you of outside worries.

Here are the top 10 benefits of taking up pottery.

Creative outlet – There are both physical and mental benefits from expressing yourself by creating something. Art offers an outlet and a release from all of that. With pottery you can produce something and express yourself in some way.

Increase optimistic outlook – Pottery enables for improvements in flow and spontaneity, provides an outlet for grief, and helps you with self-identification and self-expression, bolstering confidence and self-esteem.

Improve focus – Pottery allows you to escape the worries of life and shift your focus toward your creation. During the process, outside influences don’t affect your work so you dedicate your time to your creation. Being able to fully focus something helps the mind relax and expand, which will help you focus in other areas of life as well.

Exploring and experimentation – Pottery helps you to express your creativity, which is essentially to expand who we are and how we connect to ourselves and the environment. It’s a good way for people of all ages to explore the things they can do. You may be more creative than you think and there’s no right or wrong way in pottery.

Reduces stress – Our hands are an outlet for creativity, the sense of touch is of high importance. A lot of focus is required while you’re making pottery, therefore outside distractions are reduced and no longer stress you out.

Exercises the hands, wrists, and arms – The movement of making pottery is gentle yet strengthening to the hands, wrists, and arms. This can be beneficial to those prone to arthritis in the hands, as it promotes joint movement and dexterity.

Encourage sociability – Pottery, an activity that rouses mental activity as much as physical, is often the perfect hobby for those who prefer to expend their energy internally. While partaking in group pottery, however, one can socialize confidently with other potters while still allowing for silence. The usually casual atmosphere helps relax any socially anxious woes to help start a conversation.

A natural pain killer – Stress can oftentimes lead to feeling sensations of pain and discomfort. Since pottery is a hobby known for reducing stress and boosting self-esteem, pain caused by stress may be alleviated while taking part in pottery.

Captures memories – Archaeological digs are known for recovering ancient artifacts from civilizations long past. Some of the most well-preserved artifacts, often surviving thousands of years, are creations of pottery. As such, Your artwork has the potential to last forever. Whether or not you hope future civilizations to discover it and have it immortalized in a museum or if you would rather have it sitting in your home’s foyer, seeing the creation in its final form will serve as a reminder of your accomplishments.

Improve quality of life – Art is an important hobby for self-expression. It is a good way to connect with yourself by expanding your body and mind. Embarking on new creations, learning new techniques and finishing your creations can contribute to a lifetime commitment of learning and maintaining a productive hobby.

Read more of our Top 10 Articles