“It’s a genius way to start a business nowadays, especially because nobody’s doing it.”

The man sitting beside me is sharing the most insightful business advice I’ve heard lately. His ideas are as unconventional as the location of our conversation. We’re not in a coffee shop or a corner office. We’re in an Uber and he’s my driver.

His name is Gavin Escolar, a charismatic Filipino man with a laugh that’s even louder than his orange-and-red striped dress shirt. We’re cruising down Valencia street when I notice diamond earrings dangling on the dashboard. Around his wrist, an emerald bracelet gleams through the sunlight. In the seat pockets, glossy catalogs display more jewelry. The cover reads: Gavin Escolar’s 2014 Collection.

Then it hits me: I’m not in Gavin’s car. I’m in his mobile showroom. He’s not just an Uber driver. Nor is he just an entrepreneur. He’s an Uberpreneur, using the ridesharing app to promote his jewelry business. I find myself hoping we hit more red lights so I can hear more of Gavin’s story. He tells me how he immigrated from the Philippines to start a jewelry company in San Francisco. He recalls his initial struggles and how he became an Uber driver to make ends meet.

“My passengers surprised me,” Gavin says, remembering his early days. “I thought they would be silent or on the phone. But most people wanted to talk. When I mentioned my jewelry, they asked for business cards, but I didn’t have any.”

That’s when a light bulb went off in his mind: Why stop at business cards? Why not just show them my jewelry? So Gavin turned his car into a showroom. He positioned jewelry everywhere and stored extras in the glove compartment.

“My passengers peel back the onion,” he says. “I never solicit. I only keep subtle hints to spark conversation if they notice. If they don’t, they probably wouldn’t be my target customer anyway.”

“It’s a salesman’s dream,” he continues. “I have 10 minutes to make an impression. Would that happen if I went door-to-door? Or if I bought tiny online ads? My way, I get quality time with quality leads. Best of all, I’m being paid as I do it. It’s like Uber is providing a base salary before I make any jewelry sales.”

Gavin may be savvy, but do passengers find him sleazy? After all, they use Uber to request a ride, not a sales pitch. I’m also curious: does Uber condone drivers speaking about side businesses?