So you think you’re polyamorous, and you need some help figuring it out for certain.

While there is no universal definition of polyamory, polyamory is defined as the practice of having multiple romantic and/or sexual partners simultaneously with the full, informed consent of everyone involved.

So, polyamorous people are those who are able to have multiple romantic and/or sexual partners at the same time.

Seems simple, right?

Well, it’s not always simple. You see, figuring out that you’re polyamorous can be difficult, scary even, because society conditions us to think of polyamory as abnormal.

Before I realized I was polyamorous, I thought something was wrong with me. I had been in situations where I was in love with more than one person at once – something I was socialized to believe was not only impossible, but deviant as well.

Through the media, religion, the government and other institutions, we’re taught that the only way to experience true love is to want one person and only that person.

Society romanticizes the idea that everyone has one true soulmate, and that we won’t be happy without them – an idea which marginalizes asexual and aromantic people as well as polyamorous people.

For this reason, coming to the conclusion that you’re polyamorous can be a challenging and emotional journey.

It can also be an exciting and amazing point in your life which can lead to discovering a beautiful truth about yourself.

It might be tough to unpack the issues and thoughts you might have at this point in time.

Here are a few useful tips for coming out to yourself.

1. Take Time to Absorb and Articulate Your Feelings and Thoughts

Self-awareness is always a wonderful quality to have.

In times of crisis, great change, and self-discovery, being self-aware is particularly useful.

When I began to consider whether I was polyamorous or not, I had so many difficult thoughts and feelings. At first, I pushed all the thoughts aside because thinking about being polyamorous was so emotionally taxing for me.

But eventually, I realized it was really helpful – imperative, even – for me to dig deep into my psyche and ask myself some probing questions.

Ask yourself, why is it that you feel you’re polyamorous?

Is it that you feel that you’re capable of loving more than one person at a time? Do you feel you need to love more than one person at a time? Do you feel you need to be loved by more than one person at a time?

Or is your reason completely different? Do you feel okay with the idea of being in a relationship with someone who’s in relationships with others?

You might want to reflect on past relationships. If you felt that you had to conform to monogamous standards before, how did it work for you?

When I explored these questions, I had to look back at my past relationships with a different lens. While I had been in happy, healthy monogamous relationships, I occasionally found myself developing feelings for people while still feeling committed to others.

At the time I thought of myself as a selfish, awful person – but now I began to realize I was just a confused polyamorous person who struggled to manage their feelings.

How do you feel about monogamy? Jealousy? Sharing romantic and/or sexual partners with other people?

You might not have all the answers right now. And that’s perfectly okay – this is a journey to self-awareness, not an exam!

The answers to these questions might change over time. Remember that as people change, the way they approach their relationships might change.

The way we might experience love, romance and/or sexual attraction – if we experience it at all! – can be very fluid.

When I entered my first polyamorous relationship, I honestly had more questions than answers. I still find myself constantly re-examining previous perceptions I had about myself and my sexuality.

My feelings change depending on my partner, my emotional situation, and my mental health. For example, I hardly ever feel jealous about sharing my partner with other people, but if I’m feeling insecure about my career, body or financial situation, I tend to be more jealous.

This feeling of jealousy usually signifies that I have to dig deep emotionally and ask myself why I feel insecure.

It’s incredibly important to stay aware of these feelings and to manage them when they come instead of denying they exist at all.

2. Imagine What Your Life Might Be Like If You Were Practicing Polyamory

In a world where we’re socialized to think of monogamy as ‘normal’ and ‘natural’, we often feel the need to downplay our fantasies – especially those that don’t conform to the societal norm.

Dreaming enables us to find our desires; it helps us realize what we want, and ultimately, who we are.

And, when it comes to discovering you’re polyamorous, it can be difficult to know what you want for this very reason.

So – let yourself fantasize. What would a polyamorous lifestyle look like for you? What do you want out of polyamory?

Whether you’re daydreaming at work, school or university, in the shower, or at night before you fall asleep, try to consider what you truly want. Perhaps you’d find it useful to write or draw in a journal so that you can keep a record of your ideas and desires.

Remember, of course, that your desires will change over time.

Right now, I am in a committed romantic and sexual relationship with one partner. However, we both have the freedom to date others if we so desire. This set-up makes me happy, and I would feel happy if they had other partners, or if I had other partners.