If you want to get more productive, while also reducing stress try pen and paper. Physically writing things down with a pen and paper helps us do two things:

Remember things better Free up the mental space we need to have a focused and organized mind

Instead of committing brainpower to mentally juggling our “to-do” lists in our heads or trying to remember all of action items of that next big project, we’re free to do the real work of getting things done.

Now what to do with all of those scraps of paper and note books with half-completed to-do lists? Try writing by hand, and saving your notes digitally with Bamboo Spark where your notes will be stored on your phone or in the cloud. And the handwriting to text feature lets you cross off that annoying retyping action item on your list.

How to tackle your to-do list

Now comes the hard part: actually tackling that list. You can write things down all day long, but unless you have a plan, you’re not going to get very far.

Here are a few ways the über productive manage to get it all done:

1) Start tomorrow today

Every night, get your Bamboo Spark and take a few moments to create your to-do list for the next day. Make sure you have all of your phone calls, meetings, appointments and deadlines written down. This gives everything a place to land so that you can approach the day’s adventures with organization and a clear picture of what you need to do.

2) Schedule time for each task

One way to get it all done is to block out time for each item on your list. Add a schedule to your notes with the start time and end time for each task. Commit to shutting off your phone and staying away from distractions so you can power through.

3) Eat the frog

It might be tempting to do the easy things first to get them out of the way, but really the opposite is true. Schedule your hardest tasks first while you’re fresh and alert. Giving priority to simple tasks like responding to emails will drain your energy and leave you depleted when it comes time to handle the big stuff.

Once your list is finished and organized for maximum productivity, push the button on your Spark and place your list in Dropbox or Evernote so that it’s ready to tackle the day with you. Check out the video below for more on saving your notes to Evernote.

