As the Wimbledon championships approach, here are three books that delve into the culture, personalities and politics of the tennis world:

Photo

STRING THEORY

By David Foster Wallace

158 pp. Library of America. (2016)

In this slim compilation of five of David Foster Wallace’s writings on tennis, his intelligent and dazzling style combined with his insider knowledge (he was a junior player as a teenager) and passion deliver a multidimensional analysis of the sport. In an essay about his own career, he describes tennis as “billiards with balls that won’t hold still,” and as “chess on the run.” The volume also includes a profile of Roger Federer (“He has, figuratively and literally, re-embodied men’s tennis”). The essays have been celebrated as exceptional pieces of sports writing, and Touré, the cultural critic, once called Wallace “the Federer of tennis writing” in a piece for The Times.

Photo

OPEN

By Andre Agassi

386 pp. Alfred A. Knopf. (2009)

In this soulful and revealing autobiography, Andre Agassi recounts his 21-year career as a prodigious tennis player, including insight into how the sport ravaged his body, and why, despite his success, he wanted to escape. Growing up, his immigrant father groomed him for success, building a tennis court in their backyard where Agassi was at times yanked out of school to practice. He was then sent to a Florida tennis academy that he describes as a “glorified prison camp.” The author also goes into his personal life, with revelations about his brief marriage to Brooke Shields as well as his subsequent relationship with Steffi Graf, whom he married in 2001.

Photo

CHARGING THE NET

A History of Blacks in Tennis From Althea Gibson and Arthur Ashe to the Williams Sisters

By Cecil Harris and Larryette Kyle-DeBose

267 pp. Ivan R. Dee. (2007)

Drawing on more than 65 interviews, this wide-ranging history of black tennis players explores the role race played in their careers, and also gives in-depth stories about their lives off the court. We learn that in 2001, when Lleyton Hewitt insinuated that a black linesman was making calls in favor of James Blake because of their shared race, he later apologized in the locker room. A range of players are covered — including Althea Gibson, the Wimbledon champ who ended up broke and reclusive — but the authors also speak to umpires and coaches. The recurring theme throughout the book is an “unspoken but persistent vibe that you are not welcome.”