Slow Cooker Beef Bourguignon has crazy tender melt in your mouth beef and hearty veggies slow cooked to perfection in a rich sauce. This meal is comforting and perfect for the cold months ahead!

This is THE BEST BEEF STEW I HAVE EVER HAD!!!! If you guys are looking for a comforting, hearty and blow you away with flavor beef stew this is your recipe. Ok I am getting a little ahead of myself because I am so excited about this beef stew. Who gets excited about a beef stew? Apparently this girl.

This has the most crazy tender beef inside with hearty vegetables and it has the absolutely best rich and delicious sauce! I am a total beef stew lover especially when it cools down. It took me a couple of recipes to get it right.

These are my requirements for the perfect beef stew:

✔️ Tender melt in your mouth beef

✔️ A thick and rich sauce

✔️ Big hearty pieces of vegetables, preferably carrots, potatoes, and mushrooms.

This stew had all of that and more and my family couldn’t get enough of it!

This stew starts off with cooking some bacon. But THEN you pan sear the meat in the bacon drippings. Pan searing is just that extra step to make the edges crisp and the inside tender. Plus it just seals in the flavor!

Most good beef stews do have red wine in them. This really brings out the deep and rich flavor in the sauce. But rest assured the alcohol does get cooked out. But I promise it is necessary in really bringing out this amazing flavor in the stew!

There are a few extra steps involved in making this stew but I promise it is worth it. Once you cook the bacon and pan sear the meat, you throw it all into the crockpot and let it do its thing. This meal is truly the best flavored stew that I have ever had. I know that your family will love slow cooker beef bourguignon just as much as we did!

4.7 from 25 reviews Slow Cooker Beef Bourguignon Print Prep time 20 mins Cook time 9 hours Total time 9 hours 20 mins Slow Cooker Beef Bourguignon has crazy tender melt in your mouth beef and hearty veggies slow cooked to perfection in a rich sauce. This meal is comforting and perfect for the cold months ahead! Author: Alyssa Serves: 6 Ingredients 5 slices bacon, finely chopped

3 lbs. boneless beef chuck, cut to 1 inch cubes

1 cup red cooking wine

2 cups chicken broth

½ cup tomato sauce

¼ cup soy sauce

¼ cup flour

3 garlic cloves, finely chopped

2 Tablespoons thyme, finely chopped

5 Medium Carrots, sliced

1 pound baby potatoes (I used tri color)

8 ounce fresh mushrooms, sliced

fresh chopped parsley for garnish Instructions In a large skillet cook bacon over medium high heat until crisp. Put bacon in slow cooker. Salt and pepper the beef and add to the skillet and sear on each side for 2-3 minutes. Transfer beef to the slow cooker. Add the red wine to the skillet scraping down the brown bits on the side. Allow it to simmer and reduce and slowly add chicken broth, and tomato sauce, and soy sauce. Slowly whisk in the flour. Add the sauce to the slow cooker. Add garlic, thyme, carrots, potatoes, and mushrooms to the slow cooker. Give it a good stir and cook on low until beef is tender for 8-10 hours or high for 6-8. Garnish with fresh parley and serve with mashed potatoes if desired. 3.5.3217

Make sure to enter in our $550 Holiday Cash Giveaway!

a Rafflecopter giveaway



More delicious slow cooker beef recipes to try!

Slow Cooker Philly Cheesesteaks

Slow Cooker Barbacoa Beef

Slow Cooker Beef and Broccoli

Save