The summer used to be a fallow time for television: when most shows went into reruns and fans began the long wait for fall. But these days, you don't need to resort to "leaving the house" just because the midseason finale of Mad Men rolled around. There's an embarrassment of television riches coming this summer—including a heckuva of a lot of new sci-fi, fantasy and science—plus a few fan-favorite series like Under the Dome and Masters of Sex gearing up for second seasons. Need a reason to spend at least part of your summer on the couch? We'll give you 12. Here are all the premieres you need to add to your DVR, in chronological order:

Halt and Catch Fire

When : June 1

Where : AMC

Why : Set in Dallas, Texas during 1983, this drama about the early days of the computer revolution follows an engineer, a young tech phenom and a Don Draper-esque marketing exec as they attempt to reverse-engineer an IBM motherboard and make their very own PC clone. For a limited time, the premiere is also available on AMC's Tumblr , so stream it while you can.

Orange Is the New Black

When : June 6

Where : Netflix

Why : One of the breakout hits of the Netflix's original programming—stronger, arguably, than even House of Cards — Orange Is the New Black began as the story about an upper-middle class white girl coping with a prison sentence, but quickly became the sort of rich, compelling ensemble of diverse, complicated characters that you rarely see on TV. In the second season, we return to a Piper Chapman who is far more adapted to Litchfield prison, and a show that's even more willing to cast its gaze about the room for interesting subjects.

Rectify

When : June 19

Where : The Sundance Channel

Why : Released after 19 years on Death Row thanks to new DNA evidence that—possibly—exonerated him, Daniel Holden has returned home to a small Georgian town that wasn't quite ready to have him back. After huge praise from critics for its first season, this Southern Gothic series about crime, punishment and redemption returns with a second season of unresolved questions.

Tyrant

When : June 24

Where : FX

Why : As much as he wishes otherwise, Barry Al Fayeed isn't just a pediatrician living in Los Angeles; he's also the younger son of the dictator of Baladi, a fictional Arab country wracked by internal conflict. Created by Homeland alums Gideon Raff and Howard Gordon, Tyrant takes a look at the culture clashes that occur when Barry returns home for his nephew's wedding and finds himself drawn back into the dangerous world of the family he tried to leave behind.

The Leftovers

When : June 29

Where : HBO

Why : The newest HBO drama from Lost co-creator Damon Lindelof asks a question with apparent religious undertones: What if the Rapture really happened? But this is no preachy Left Behind ; based on the Tom Perrotta novel of the same name (Perrotta is the show's other creator), it's a hauntingly everyday look at an apocalypse not of fire but of absence and its aftermath in the small, suburban community of Mapletown, New York.

Under the Dome

When : June 30

Where : CBS

Why : Based on the Stephen King novel about a small town trapped in a mysterious, impenetrable sphere Under the Dome scored big ratings last summer—and ended on a cliffhanger. King himself returns to script the debut episode of the new season, as the town adjusts to their new reality and the revelations about the true origin of the dome.

The Bridge

When : July 9

Where : FX

Why : After an award-winning debut season, FX's taut U.S.-Mexico border drama returns this summer with a story that has evolved beyond its serial-killer hook to a broader look at the complex relationships between the U.S. and Mexican worlds of law enforcement and crime, between detectives Sonya Cross and Marco Ruiz, and perhaps most importantly between the growing cast of morally ambiguous characters who are turning this odd couple detective show into a dangerously fascinating world.

The Strain

When : July 13

Where : FX

Why : Vampires are currently neck-in-neck with zombies as the most played-out monsters in media, but I'll still be watching The Strain for one reason: Guillermo del Toro. His work on Pan's Labyrinth , Hellboy , and Pacific Rim has proven over and over that the man knows how to harness the mythic appeal of monsters&wdash;which means that this horror series, based on his novel trilogy about a vampiric outbreak in New York City, warrants at least a tryout in your DVR.

Masters of Sex

When : July 13

Where : Showtime

Why : The second season of Masters of Sex moves to the hotter months, delighting everyone who enjoyed the drama inspired by the real-life story of revolutionary sex researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnston. It's a show that hasn't been afraid to explore where sex, sexiness, and sexism collide, how tragically the professional and personal horizons of women were limited even 50 years ago, and the exceptional bravery it took to turn the tide of ignorance and prudishness in the name of science.

Manhattan

When : July 27

Where : WGN America

Why : Set not in New York City but in Los Alamos, New Mexico, this 1940s drama follows the scientists racing to build the first atomic bomb and how their secrets transformed their lives in the strange, secluded community of Los Alamos, New Mexico.

Outlander

When : August 9

Where : Starz

Why : Now that Game of Thrones has proved fantasy novels can sizzle on television, it's time for Diana Gabaldon's best-selling Outlander novels to get their shot. With Ron Moore ( Battlestar Galactica ) at the helm, the series follows a married 1940s combat nurse named Claire Randall who finds herself torn between two lives (and loves) when she falls through time into 18th century Scotland. Game of Thrones fans take note: Tobias Menzies (aka GoT 's Edmure Tully) stars as both Claire's husband Frank and his ancestor Jonathan “Black Jack” Randall.

BoJack Horseman

When : August TBD

Where : Netflix

Why : There hasn't been much original programming for the Adult Swim set on Netflix, but that's about to change that this summer with BoJack Horseman , a surreal animated comedy about a whiskey-swilling anthropomorphic horse who used to be a TV star. Will Arnett and Breaking Bad star Aaron Paul lend their voices to the series, which was designed by cartoonist Lisa Hanawalt and sounds perfect for those late summer nights when things just need to get a little weird.