During the month of March, we're gathering some of our best problem solvers together into master "Home Remedies" posts to help you make your home healthier, solving one problem at a time. Today, help for all the indoor gardeners out there that struggle with keeping house plants healthy. A little greenery does so much for a space, it's worth it to learn the ins and outs of maintenance so you can cultivate your own stylish jungle...

Buying plants can be overwhelming, especially houseplants, but with a little knowledge and understanding, you'll have a healthy indoor jungle in no time. To get the best start, here are some tips for buying the healthiest houseplants.

A great houseplant can help add a finished look to a room and breathe fresh air into a stale space, but if the plant starts to die it can look worse than not having any plants at all. I turned to Newport Beach-based landscape designer Bridget Skinner for a few tips on caring for houseplants so they look their best all year round.

I looooove fiddle leaf figs. I first noticed them in Wilson's office on House, of all places. I'd get so distracted admiring the plant that I'd have to rewind to catch the dialogue. Now that I have my own fiddle leaf fig, it's affectionately known as "the Wilson plant." The good news is, if I can take care of one, you can too. Here are some tips for keeping them healthy and happy.

One of the biggest frustrations of living in a space with limited light is the seemingly impossible task of keeping your houseplants happy. While all plants do need light to survive, even those with a shortage of natural light are in luck if they know what to shop for.

When I finally killed my low-light, hard-to-kill ZZ Plant, I knew plants just weren't "my thing." In a last-ditch effort to save the rest of my indoor garden, I'm turning to tips and tricks that, the experts say, can save sad-looking plants from certain death. Like watering them with bottled soda water instead of what comes out of the tap.

Most people think that having a green thumb is just something you're born with. Little do they know all it takes to keep your household foliage alive is a little 411. Are you chronically killing your leafy friends? Here are a few reasons why another one might be biting the dust.