The reaction to the report was described as “mindblowing” by its editor, Shardul Agrawala, head of the organization’s environment and economic integration division. “Since then, every time there is a warm winter, it bubbles up again and there is new interest,” he said.

Many of the report’s findings have since been taken into account by governments of the Alpine countries as well as by the ski industry.

“What is happening is largely related to more reactive measures,” Mr. Agrawala said. He noted an “exponential” increase in the reliance on snow-making machines, the development of upper reaches of ski areas, more grooming of slopes, and a turn toward shaded, north-facing slopes, where snow — when there is any — lingers for longer.

“It is about how much you can squeeze with existing snow, or supplement with snow making, but there may be limits to both,” he said.

Snow — “white gold,” they call it here — did fall over much of the French Alps after the New Year, just as the crucial holiday season was coming to an end.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Here at Chamonix-Mont-Blanc, one of France’s highest ski resorts, 42 percent of the region’s 507 ski runs were closed during the holidays, according to Fabienne Martinez, communications director for the Compagnie du Mont-Blanc, which runs the resort.

Up until the late snowfall, skiing was concentrated on the upper runs of the north-facing Grands Montets slope, making for crowded and icy skiing.

But at least there was some snow. At some nearby low-lying resorts, helicopters were spotted dropping buckets of fresh snow to replace the fast melting slush on the baby slopes below.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even Chamonix had to come up with ways to keep its visitors busy — petting zoos for children, air rifle contests for adults, paragliding for the brave.

It was saved by the unique gold mine on its doorstep — Mont Blanc, Western Europe’s highest mountain, which can be best viewed from a ride up to the nearby peak, the 12,600-foot-high Aiguille du Midi, and other scenic tours that don’t involve skiing, but are included in the region’s unlimited ski pass, together with the local swimming pool, ice skating rink and museum.

These added attractions helped increase the sales of unlimited daily ski passes 15 percent and sent the number of rides up to the Aiguille du Midi soaring 65 percent compared with last year, Ms. Martinez said.

France’s $2 billion ski industry is the largest of the five major Alpine nations. French mountains are also a major employer, reportedly the country’s biggest during the four winter months that traditionally make up the Alpine skiing season.

Given the importance and the fragility of winter tourism, French ski resorts are scrambling not only to make up for the snow deficit, but also to keep visitors entertained in a world where they can always jump on a plane and go to a beach.

The days of skiing in the Alps are not numbered, said Mr. Agrawala, who has skied the mountains himself. “It will just be more concentrated at higher altitudes,” he predicted. “There will be winners and losers.”