When a child drowned not far from his residence in Australia, Crowe handed over $200,000 to build a community swimming pool that would offer swim lessons to local public schools. When a Jewish school in Montreal was bombed in 2004, a clear hate crime, Crowe popped in out of nowhere and gave away a quarter of a million dollars to help the school rebuild. When another pool in Australia needed $40,000 to add handicapped access, Crowe supplied the entire sum. Basically, if you're an Aussie and you have pool-related problems, Russell Crowe has got that shit covered. And that's without counting his smaller acts of charity, like when a public basketball court needed a new net and he showed up to install it by himself.

Twitter

He almost came back and ripped it away when he saw that pun.

Crowe is also a good guy to have as a friend. After his pal Mark "Spud" Carroll's rugby career ended, Crowe helped to fund a gymnasium for him to run. If you're in a band with Crowe, though, that's the bee's pajamas. In 2001, Crowe invited the other members of his old band Thirty Odd Foot Of Grunt to crash at a place he owned ... and just let them live there, rent-free, for 15 years. Sadly, they had to leave in 2016 when the place was sold as part of a divorce settlement. Hopefully, they'll adjust to their new life inside Russell Crowe's ex-wife's closet.

Justin has a life-changing comedy site, a Twitter, and an old farty dog.

It's Spring Break! You know what that means: hot coeds getting loose on the beaches of Cancún and becoming imperiled in all classic beach slasher ways: man-eating shark, school of piranhas, James Franco with dreadlocks. There are so many films about vacations gone wrong, it's a chore to wonder if there's even such a thing as a movie vacation gone right. Amity Island and Camp Crystal Lake are out. So what does that leave? The ship from Wall-E? Hawaii with the Brady Bunch? A road trip with famous curmudgeon Chevy Chase? On this month's live podcast Jack O'Brien and the Cracked staff are joined by some special guest comedians to figure out what would be the best vacation to take in a fictional universe. Tickets are $7 and can be purchased here!

Also check out 5 Heartwarming Stories to Restore Your Faith In Celebrities and 5 Times A Celebrity's Kindness Made A Real-Life Impact.

Subscribe to our YouTube channel, and check out 6 Things You Do Every Day That Have Horrifying Consequences, and other videos you won't see on the site!

Follow us on Facebook, and let's be best friends forever.