A review of every construction fatality in the past two years by The New York Times has found that many could have been, as a federal investigation into one accident put it, “completely avoidable.” Time and again, in thousands of pages of safety reports, handwritten notes, crude drawings, lawsuits and other documents, as well as interviews with the workers’ relatives and friends, the same issues emerged.

Most construction sites where workers died failed to take basic steps to prevent them from falling. Workers frequently did not wear harnesses or helmets, as required by law. Supervision was often lacking. In many of the projects, a premium was placed on speed, causing workers to take dangerous shortcuts.

About a quarter of the deaths took place in Midtown, attracting a vast majority of news media attention for such accidents. But the rest occurred, largely unnoticed, all over the city. They usually involved smaller projects, using nonunion workers, who were often poorly trained. Often the contractors had been previously cited for safety violations and failed to pay penalties.

Seven workers have died on the job since July, including three in a nine-day stretch before Labor Day, according to records of the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration, or OSHA.

The city’s Buildings Department keeps its own count of construction deaths, injuries and accidents, offering a broader look at safety year over year. There were 10 construction-related fatalities in the most recent fiscal year, from July 2014 to July 2015, according to city figures. In contrast, the annual average over the previous four years was 5.5.

Two Years of Fatalities Locations in New York where workers have died in construction-related accidents from Nov. 2013 through Oct. 2015, according to the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration and the city’s Department of Buildings. BRONX MANHATTAN QUEENS NEW JERSEY BROOKLYN STATEN ISLAND Locations in New York where workers have died in construction- related accidents from Nov. 2013 through Oct. 2015. BRONX MANHATTAN QUEENS BROOKLYN STATEN ISLAND

Meanwhile, 324 workers were injured in the last fiscal year, a jump of 53 percent, and the Buildings Department recorded 314 accidents over all, an increase of 52 percent from the year before. The total was more than two and a half times what the city tallied in 2011. In comparison, permits for new construction projects grew by only 11 percent in the last fiscal year and permits for renovation and other work by 6 percent.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“There is absolutely no doubt that there is a real problem with construction safety,” said Mark G. Peters, the commissioner of the city’s Investigation Department, which looks into construction fatalities.

An improving economy and low interest rates helped fuel the current building boom, but there are signs that more is to come. Mayor Bill de Blasio is embracing vertical construction to help make housing more affordable. And uncertainty over the future of a lucrative tax abatement program for developers caused many to rush to file new construction permits this year.

The deaths make clear that the city is being built, or in some cases rebuilt, heavily on the backs of recent immigrants, particularly from Latin America, most of them not authorized to work in this country.

Immigrants, of course, have long dominated the construction trade, from the Irish in earlier generations to Eastern Europeans more recently. But among those who have died over the past two years, many were especially vulnerable because of their legal status. They were frequently poorly trained, paid in cash and afraid of speaking up about unsafe conditions, according to records and interviews with friends and relatives. Having largely existed on society’s margins, in death, there was often little to mark that they ever lived.

Photo

Such was the story with Mr. Colorado, who arrived from Veracruz, Mexico, about 15 years ago, and is survived by his girlfriend, Haydee Vazquez, and their two sons.

Mr. Colorado’s shoulders chronically ached from lifting heavy wooden beams, Ms. Vazquez said, but he felt that he needed to keep working, or some other worker would just take his place. After his fatal fall in March 2014, she was unable to learn anything more about the accident from his former employer.

“I still don’t know what happened,” she said, wiping tears from her eyes, in an interview at her apartment in Bushwick, Brooklyn. “I don’t know if he had any last words.”

Big Jobs

Gurmeet Singh came to America on a tourist visa about 13 years ago from a farming village near Kapurthala, in the Punjab region of northern India. He did not return home until his body was shipped back in April 2014.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Singh, a former soldier in the Indian Army, found brick-pointing and other construction work in New York. For a time, he shared an apartment in Richmond Hill, Queens, with a rotating cast of three or four men, usually fellow Sikhs. He eventually began sending money back to his family in monthly installments of around $2,000, according to receipts provided by relatives.

Construction Accidents New York City, fiscal years Injuries Deaths 10 300 200 4 100 2015 2015 2011 2011

Two sons later came to the United States and roomed with him briefly; both are now in Kentucky, one working at a gas station and the other at a restaurant, said a daughter, Rajwinder Kaur, who now lives in South Ozone Park, Queens. Before his death, Mr. Singh told relatives in India that he hoped to return soon. But he decided to stay for one more job: the Dream Hotel on West 55th Street.

“The boss said: ‘Can you just finish this job? I’ll give you $10,000 and a free ticket to India,’” his other daughter, Palwinder Kaur, said in a telephone interview from India.

That boss, Mr. Singh’s family said, was Adalat Khan, a Pakistani-American businessman and fellow Punjabi speaker. Mr. Singh considered Mr. Khan a friend, having long worked for him, Mr. Singh’s family said. But Mr. Khan told investigators after the Dream Hotel accident: “I do not know the name of the deceased.”

Mr. Khan was a subcontractor for a Queens firm, Alpha General Contracting. And though he said he had been in business for five or six years, he admitted to investigators that he did not know much about construction.

“I have no education for reading drawings,” he said, according to interview notes by safety administration investigators released under a federal Freedom of Information Act request.