Forty states have voted for the same party in four straight presidential elections. And the electoral map doesn’t look all that different this fall.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That means that roughly the same swing states have continued to wield influence. And two of those already have outsize sway for a reason other than the Electoral College: Iowa and New Hampshire traditionally shape the race with early primary contests.

Another separate reason that New Hampshire might be a power broker this year is that a close down-ballot race — Kelly Ayotte vs. Maggie Hassan — could determine which party controls the Senate.

At the other extreme are states like California, Texas and New York. Their combined population is more than a fourth of the United States total, and their residents are essentially sitting out another presidential election.

With these disparities in mind, I asked Rick Hasen, a professor of law and political science at the University of California, Irvine, about some of the laws that govern how people can try to maximize their influence. He also writes The Election Law Blog. Here’s a lightly edited version of our email conversation:

Q. Vote buying is obviously illegal. But what about gray areas?

1) Let’s say you’re a Californian and you’re feeling left out of the election. You have a nephew in Florida who is apolitical and a big sports fan. You tell him that if he votes for Donald J. Trump, you’ll take him to a Lakers game and a nice dinner the next time he visits Los Angeles. (It’s understood that you’ll pay for the tickets and dinner because that’s what you normally do on such occasions.) Would that be considered against the law? If so, and if it somehow ever came to light, what might the penalty be?

2) Or another example. You have an 18-year-old niece in Ohio; she’s undecided and unsure if she’ll vote. For her birthday, you give her $100 instead of the usual $50, give her a wink in front of her family and say, “I’m not suggesting it’s a bribe, but if you vote for Hillary Clinton, I certainly won’t mind.” (Everyone chuckles.)

A. These questions are similar to those that commonly come up in bribery prosecutions. When is there enough evidence of a deal (a “quid pro quo” exchange) to show that the transaction is illegal.

1) Certainly if I say to a stranger, if you vote for Trump I will give you Laker tickets and take you to dinner — that would be a bribe. The fact that it is an uncle and nephew with a pre-existing relationship may make proving the deal harder, especially if there is a history of the uncle giving gifts to the nephew. Under a federal statute (52 U.S.C. s 10307(c)), “Whoever knowingly or willfully … pays or offers to pay or accepts payment either for registration to vote or for voting shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned not more than five years.”

2) Like the first example, it turns on intent, and the familial relationship may make it harder to prove it is illegal vote buying. But if the aunt says to the niece, “I will give you $50 to vote for Hillary Clinton,” that could well be found to cross the line.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Q. College students can have the choice to vote in their college town instead of their hometown, with the possibility of choosing a battleground state over a safe state. Do some states make it tougher for out-of-state college students to register and vote?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A. There have been instances in which local officials have made it harder for college students to vote. This is not just an issue for presidential elections, but for local elections as well, where people who live in a town don’t want college students to swamp their votes. The Supreme Court, however, has ruled that college students have the right to vote at the place they consider their residence — Symm v. United States, 439 U.S. 1105 (1979). Still, states sometimes do things that make it harder for students to vote, such as imposing strict voter identification rules but not accepting IDs issued by colleges for proof of identity. Texas, for example, accepts concealed weapons permits but not student IDs. Sometimes local bodies refuse to put polling stations near colleges. The Brennan Center offers a Student Voting Guide that helps students navigate the sometimes complex rules for voting.

[Note: Last week, The Times published a guide to voter registration deadlines, state by state.]

Q. If someone owns homes in different states and wants to choose to vote in a state that is a battleground, how much leeway does that person have?

A. The clear rule is that a person can have only one residence for voting at a time, and one cannot vote twice in the same election for president. There is some leeway on establishing what counts as one’s residence. An article in the Election Law Journal explores this issue for college students, but it is a much broader issue, and the question of what counts as one’s residence can be murky. Here’s how the Federal Voting Assistance Program explains it for military and other overseas voters: “Your voting residence is within your State of legal residence or domicile. It is the true, fixed address that you consider your permanent home and where you had a physical presence. Your State of legal residence is used for State income tax purposes, and determines eligibility to vote for federal and State elections and qualification for in-state tuition rates.” There has been a movement to allow nonresidents to vote in certain local elections when they are vacation homeowners, but that doesn’t affect the rule about voting only once in presidential elections.

Q. Internet-aided vote swapping seems to have occurred first in the 2000 election. Some partisans of Al Gore and Ralph Nader had a friendly arrangement to help Gore in swing states in exchange for helping Nader in safely Democratic states. It seems to have worked, but the problem for Gore is that the swapping didn’t happen quite enough.

Photo

What would be considered crossing the line, and what type of dynamic could we see this fall?

A. In this election, it would allow, for example, a Jill Stein supporter in a swing state like Ohio to vote for Hillary Clinton in exchange for a Clinton supporter in a safe state like California to agree to vote for Jill Stein. The supposed benefit of this trade is that the Ohio voter helps Clinton get elected in a place where a vote for a third-party candidate can act as a spoiler, but Stein’s overall popular vote totals would be the same, potentially entitling Stein to some public financing for her campaign and showing the candidate’s popularity.

Some have claimed that vote swapping constitutes illegal vote buying under federal law or state statutes. The California Secretary of State went after a website that offered vote swapping in the 2000 election, claiming that it violated state anti-vote buying prohibitions. The case, Porter v. Bowen, went to the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, which held that the activity was protected by the First Amendment and did not raise the danger of an exchange of money for votes. The state tried to take it to the full Ninth Circuit, which refused to take the case. Three judges, however, issued a dissenting statement suggesting that vote swapping is illegal vote buying not protected by the First Amendment, and it is quite possible that another court would agree with the dissenters should the issue arise again.

[Update: A website has been created for such vote swapping, and there’s also a site aimed at Republicans.]

Q. What’s your own view on the legality of vote swapping?

A. I am uncertain whether vote swapping would count as illegal vote buying. One key point is that these kinds of agreements are inherently unenforceable, given the secret ballot. You might tell me you are Stein supporter in Ohio who would vote for Clinton if I would vote for Stein, but you could be someone sitting in another country, or a Stein supporter in Ohio who still plans to vote for Stein.

But the larger point is that people are looking for ways around the fact that we have this odd system, where we make it really easy for third-party candidates to get on the ballot in most places, but almost impossible for them to win. A much more rational solution to this problem would be to adopt instant runoff voting [in which voters rank candidates in order of preference] so that a vote for Stein could go to Clinton (or for Gary Johnson could go to Trump) if that’s a voter’s second choice.