Photo

Representative Steve Scalise had surgery on Thursday to control an infection that led him to be moved back into a Washington hospital’s intensive care unit the day before, the hospital said in a statement.

The hospital, MedStar Washington Hospital Center, which has been treating Mr. Scalise since he was gravely wounded in a shooting on June 14 at a congressional baseball practice, said on Thursday evening that the congressman had “tolerated the procedure well.” Mr. Scalise remains in serious condition, the hospital said.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox Monday through Friday. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

In its statement, MedStar did not identify the nature of the infection or the type of surgery he underwent. Including his procedure on Thursday, Mr. Scalise has had at least three operations in the past three weeks. Doctors have said he will face additional operations to repair broken bones and extensive abdominal injuries.

Mr. Scalise was standing near second base at a Virginia ball field during an early-morning practice when the gunman, James T. Hodgkinson, opened fire, striking the congressman in the left hip. The bullet shattered bones and ripped through internal organs as it tore across his abdomen, doctors said. As the gunman continued firing, Mr. Scalise crawled into the grassy outfield.

Four people were shot, but Mr. Scalise, who is from Louisiana and is the No. 3 Republican in the House, was the most seriously injured and arrived at MedStar in critical condition. In his first hours in the hospital, doctors worked to control his internal bleeding before he underwent the initial surgeries.