Wikimedia

A series of viral tweets by former Congressional staff member Emily Ellsworth offered advice on how to get your representative to take notice and hear you out.

I worked for Congress for 6 years, and here's what I learned about how they listen to constituents. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Ellsworth, a Salt Lake City-based writer and editor, worked for Rep. Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, and Rep. Chris Stewart, R-Utah, for whom she acted as a liaison for people and the federal agencies, CNN reported.

Take a look at her tips for capturing your congressman or congresswoman's attention, which also includes what doesn't work.

First, tweeting or writing on Facebook is largely ineffective. I never looked at those comments except to remove the harassing ones. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Second, writing a letter to the district office (state) is better than sending an email or writing a letter to DC. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

But, the most effective thing is to actually call them on the phone. At their district (state) office. They have to talk to you there. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

We repped half a million people, it was impossible to read and respond personally to all letters. Impossible. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

This was something in particular that I cared about as a staffer and worked very hard on, but the sheer volume of emails is overwhelming — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

So, we batched them with computer algorithms and sent out form letters based on topic and position. Regardless of method received. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

But, phone calls! That was a thing that shook up our office from time. One time, a radio host gave out our district office phone # on air. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

He was against our immigration policy and told our constituents to call. And they did. All. Day. Long. All I did all day was answer phones. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

It was exhausting and you can bet my bosses heard about it. We had discussions because of that call to action. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

If we started getting a pattern of calls, I called up our DC office and asked if they were getting the same calls and we talked. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Also, recognize that your letters and your emails get seen by staffers, just like your phone calls get answered. That's the way of it. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

If you want to talk to your rep, show up at town hall meetings. Get a huge group that they can't ignore. Pack that place and ask questions. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

We held town halls consistently that fewer than 50 people showed up for. And it was always the same people. So, shake it up. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Ellsworth also revealed how staffers can be powerful allies.

As always, please be kind but firm with those staffers. They will listen and talk to you. I always, always did. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

If you run an advocacy group, invite local staffers to show up to your events. Let them talk to people you work with and set up meetings. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

I loved getting out of my office and meeting with advocates in immigration, healthcare, education, science, and every type of work. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Invite staffers on "field trips" and show them what it's like in your communities. Show them the work you are doing. It works. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Are you noticing a pattern here? The staff are the ones who run the ground game for Congress. Work on helping them understand and learn. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

Because, if the staff knows you, when they have a question about a piece of legislation or amendment, they will be the one you call. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

And, that's the best I've got for you now. I hope it helps.



Use your resources the best way you can and get their attention. — Emily Ellsworth (@editoremilye) November 12, 2016

"Like a lot of people, I've been reeling from the election," Ellsworth, a registered Republican who campaigned for Hillary Clinton, told CNN. "So I thought people might like to know how you mobilize and activate individual communities to reach each member of Congress. I just thought I have this knowledge, and I did this for six years, and it's probably important for people to know what those specific actions are."

Correction: The previous headline of this story wrongly identified Ellsworth as a "Capitol Hill staff member," and a previous sub-headline identified her as a "White House staffer." Ellsworth did not work in Capitol Hill, she worked in the district offices of Reps. Jason Chaffetz and Chris Stewart, both of whom represent the state of Utah.