True meditation has no direction or goal. It is pure wordless surrender, pure silent prayer. All methods aiming at achieving a certain state of mind are limited, impermanent, and conditioned.

What is true meditation?

Continuing the process of attaining primordial awareness defines True Meditation. It appears spontaneously without the control or manipulation of consciousness. When we start with the meditation process, we tend to notice that our attention is being focused on a particular object – physical sensations, thoughts, memories, emotions, sounds, and others.

According to this article from a modern day zen master, enlightenment is this:

“Enlightenment is a destructive process. It has nothing to do with becoming better or being happier. It is the crumbling away of untruth. It sees through the facade of pretense. It’s the complete eradication of everything we imagined to be true.”

This happens because our mind is conditioned and trained to focus on objects and contract on them. Once done, our mind is made to interpret and control the object but in a distorted and mechanical manner. And it starts to conclude and assume as per conditioning process in the past.

“Freedom is not necessarily exciting. It’s just free. Very peaceful and quiet, so very quiet. Of course, it is also filled with joy and wonder, but it is not what you imagine. It is much, much less.”

All objects – in true meditation – are in their natural force of operation. They do not require any effort to manipulate, focus, suppress or control any other object for awareness. True meditation puts forth an emphasis on the process of being aware and not having an awareness of an object. It is based on existing knowledge.

Primordial or existing awareness is the source of all objects subsiding and arising. Once we

start relaxing into listening and awareness, the compulsive contraction of our mind around objects start to fade away.

Meditation is a quality of being

According to spiritual guru Osho, meditation is simply a quality of being that is another word for medicine. Once we learn this kind of awareness, it projects to all areas of our lives:

“Meditation is a quality of being that you bring to the act. It is not a particular act, it is not that you do this then it is meditation – that you sit in a certain posture, siddhasana, and you keep your spine erect, and you keep your eyes closed or you look at the tip of your nose or you watch your breath, then it is meditation – no, these are just devices for the beginners…

“Do you know that the words meditation and medicine come from the same root? Meditation is a kind of medicine; its use is only for the time being. Once you have learned the quality, then you need not do any particular meditation, then the meditation has to spread all over your life. Only when you are meditative twenty-four hours a day then can you attain, then you have attained. Even sleeping is meditation.”