I had a lot of different ideas of what I might be when I grew up. An astronaut was an early vision before I learned how math can ruin anything. I went through life like everyone does, trying on different ideas of myself and seeing how they fit. I could have been a lawyer, I could have been a musician, I could have gotten a tattoo, I could have lived in Nepal. But I couldn't have been a dad. Mainly because, in most cases, the first step to becoming something is to think, “Hey, I’d like to become that.” And I just never really had such thoughts about fatherhood.

“Why?” you ask. “I don’t know,” I answer. It just always struck me as the kind of thing you should really want to do. It’s not a casual decision that you can openly regret later like, “Hey, do you want to eat all these nachos then go ride the Tilt-A-Whirl?” Fatherhood has life-long repercussions for at least three lives. Maybe more. (Again, math and I aren't particularly friendly.)

My non-fatherhood was purely theoretical, though. More of a “Not really” than a “Hell no!” The idea hadn't been field tested or put through any real-world research. But then I got married. And it takes two to not tango. My wife, Amy, and I discussed the possibility of kids, we discussed the possibility of no kids. Both options had their pros and cons, but we were in no real hurry either way. The only thing we knew for sure is that we were getting a dog. Someday.

Then a funny thing happened. I fell in love. With my wife, of all people. It had already happened once, so I really wasn't expecting it. But there it was. We went and foolishly fell in love with one another again. And again. And, hey look there, again. We learned how to be married to each other, an ongoing lesson if ever there is one. This increasing fondness for one another led to greater intimacy. Greater honesty. Then one day, one of us — and I truly don’t remember who — said it for real: “Maybe we don’t have kids.”

Well, now. Once a thing like that is out there, it has to be taken seriously.

There was this idea now, of a life together with no company of our own conception. As this notion percolated for a year, maybe two, we only warmed to it more. It felt right. Felt like the life we both wanted to live.

Of course, there are ways to not get pregnant that don’t involve surgery. This is true. And they were all terrible for us. You’re thinking maybe we didn't try the one you use, the one with the stuff or the thing or the “no muss, no fuss” what-have-you. Well, we did. And it was terrible. Every single form of birth control involves a measure of compromise. We knew what we wanted. We knew what we didn't want. So, one day we made a decision.

A vasectomy isn't some sort of drive-through procedure like a flu shot. You don’t just roll into the doctor’s office and say, “Cut me, Mick.” There has to be a consultation. I was fully prepared for the doctor to try to talk me out of it. If I were in the vasectomy trade in today’s litigious society, I would make it my duty to talk people out of it. Make them hold a laughing baby, play catch with an adorable kid missing one front tooth, watch Jon Voight and Ricky Schroeder in “The Champ.” Because, frankly, if you can be talked out it, you shouldn't be there. But the doctor didn't do anything like that. He asked me a few questions, I answered them honestly, and he scheduled my procedure — for two months later.

It’s possible the guy was just that busy. That it was high season for the vas deferens harvest. But I think those two months are where the doctor was allowing people to get talked out of it. By themselves. It’s one thing to come to an intellectual decision about your choice to not have children. It’s another to know that on a specific date in the not-too-distant future a man is going to take a small knife, carve up your reproductive organs, and permanently prune a branch of your family tree. It’s possible, under such circumstances, that doubt itself could procreate. That it could birth second thoughts by the litter as the day grew closer.

But it turned out my inner thoughts and feelings were well aligned. There were no battles of will, no great debates from within. Not to say there were no emotions whatsoever.

On the eve of the procedure, there was a sense of anxiety around the house. Not just mine, knowing I was about to undergo a bit of trauma in an area I’d heretofore protected so vigilantly. There was something else. This sense between Amy and me of, for lack of a better word, loss. We didn't have children. And we weren't going to. Ever. It was a serious thing, this. And serious things tend to touch our deepest emotions.

We both got a little sad. A little weepy. My wife, through a few tears, said the sweetest thing. “I know some people have kids because they want to see themselves in their children. But I would have wanted to see you.”

I lay in bed that night waiting for sleep. Nothing in the house was different. Just the hum of the refrigerator, the occasional car passing by. But the only thing I could hear was the silence. How our home suddenly seemed so quiet.