When you think of honeyed dishes to enjoy in the fall, what comes to mind? Maybe a sweet, sticky baked good comes to mind, or some glazed bacon wrapped around some chicken? Or maybe you think of a sweet sauce to coat that chicken in another way, or maybe you’re just drizzling it into your tea and over all those cider doughnuts from the local apple orchard? Whatever your favorite way to enjoy it, we think you need to check out a new option you’ve probably never considered: pork!









Yes, today we’re making a Honey Pork Roast, with a delicious sauce featuring soy sauce that adds a tasty, sweet-and-tangy bite to that other white meat. Best of all? We’re making it in the slow cooker! It doesn’t get easier or more delicious than this one, so let us show you how it’s made, then read on for the full recipe. (And if chicken is your favorite, don’t miss our great Honey Soy Chicken dish!)

SLOW COOKER HONEY PORK ROAST

Serves 6 to 8

Prep Time: 5 minutes

Total Time: 6 hours 5 minutes

INGREDIENTS

3 to 4 pounds pork loin roast

2 tablespoons dried oregano

2 tablespoons dried basil

½ teaspoon black pepper

¾ teaspoon salt

2 tablespoons garlic, minced

½ cup honey

2 tablespoons olive oil

¼ cup soy sauce

⅔ cup Parmesan cheese, grated

DIRECTIONS

Place the pork loin roast in the inner pot of a slow cooker. In a medium bowl, combine the dried oregano, dried basil, black pepper, salt, minced garlic, honey, soy sauce and Parmesan cheese, and mix well. Pour the sauce over the pork loin roast into the slow cooker. Cover and cook on low for 6 to 8 hours. Remove the cooked pork loin roast from the slow cooker, reserving the liquid. Shred the meat. Add the reserved cooking liquid to a saucepan and bring to a boil. Reduce the heat and simmer until reduced and thickened. Pour the reduced, thickened sauce over the shredded meat and serve.

TipHero

What we love about this dish is that it feels and tastes super special and fancy, but it’s actually so simple to make. All you need to do is spend about five minutes whipping up a sauce, then just set your slow cooker and go about your day. It’s basically a cooking dream! Whether you want to impress somebody or just treat yourself, this recipe is definitely one that’s good to have in your arsenal.

TipHero

So what do you think? Will you be giving this Slow Cooker Honey Pork Roast a try? Are there any ways you might switch it up and make it your own? Tell us if you try it out and how it turns out for you!

Recipe adapted from Cooking Panda