Sometimes, a chart or infographic is the best way to communicate complex topics—like what the different types of cuts of beef are (and how to cook them) and how to fix common cooking mistakes. Here are some of the most save- or print-worthy food graphics we've shared on Lifehacker.

10. Foods That Keep You Full and Prevent an Energy Crash

This chart graphs foods based on how full they make you and whether or not they give you a sugar high (and subsequent sugar crash). Post it on your fridge to remind you to reach for oranges or apples instead of bananas, eggs instead of cereal.

9. How to Cook Anything on the Grill

It's always grilling season, isn't it? Keep this chart handy by your grill to get the timing right for meats and veggies. They're approximate times and temperatures, but that's still a whole lot better than just winging it.

8. Pick the Most Nutritious Produce

Not all fruits and vegetables are the same, if you're looking to improve a certain area of health. This colorful chart highlights the nutritional qualities of different vegetables at a glance, so while you're planning your weekly meals or shopping in the store, you can choose wisely. (Eat the rainbow!)

7. Put an End to Wasted Food

Spoiled food is a terrible waste—of our money and, obviously, fresh food. Without guides like these, though, it's hard to know how long foods will last before you have to throw them out. The chart identifies the "prime" storage time for various foods, on the counter, in the fridge, or in the freezer.

6. How to Eat the Rainbow

Many of us aren't eating enough of different produce to reap their benefits. This graphic offers suggestions for getting your fill of each color, the benefits you can expect from doing so, and other miscellaneous facts like sneaking more "greens" in your diet with green tea.

5. Turn Pantry Staples into 20+ Meals

Having a well-stocked pantry could mean all the difference between being able to whip up a quick meal or entertain last-minute and having to run to the grocery store or order out. This flowchart/graphic turns pantry staples into multiple meals.

4. Know How to Substitute Common Cooking Ingredients

No matter how well you think you've stocked your pantry, though, there's a chance you're working with a recipe that calls for something you just don't have on hand. I mean, who has an endless supply of fresh buttermilk in their fridge? This graphic offers substitutions for common and uncommon ingredients.

3. Know What You Can Turn into Compost

You've got kitchen/household scraps. Can you turn them into gardening gold instead of garbage? Instead of tossing food out, check out this graphic which highlights the many trash-headed items that could be used instead to improve your garden—even dryer lint, hair/fur, or fireplace ashes.

2. Learn How to Use Your Knife

Perhaps the most important tool in your kitchen, the knife is one instrument you'll want to master. This graphic highlights the differences between different knives, the different kinds of cuts you might want to use, and more knife-y tips.

1. Check Cooking Times, Weight Conversions, Meat Cuts, and More in One Cheat Sheet

GIF

Want just one cheat sheet to cover lots of cooking and shopping territory? Here you go. Useful for on your fridge and/or while selecting something to cook.

Bon appétit!