If you want the inside scoop on spotting quality leather goods, there's no better person to ask than someone who hand-makes leather bags and wallets for a living. That's why we asked Bellanie Salcedo of Chester Mox to explain what separates the good stuff from the junk. Next time you're looking for leather, keep these things in mind and you're sure to come away with a quality product.

1. Look at the Leather

Fine leather should feel heavy. Chester Mox

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

This one may seem obvious, but it's actually very important to closely examine any leather good you're considering buying. Watch out for leather that looks like the finish has been painted on, or if the material has a slightly vinyl-like smell. If possible, pull and bend the leather. It shouldn't have any signs of breaking or tearing. High quality leather should also feel heavy, because of the high-density of the fibers. Lightweight leather is often of poor quality. More often than not, it will feel a bit spongy as well.

Most Popular

2. See the Stitching

A handmade saddle stitch. Chester Mox

After the materials, there's the quality of the stitching. Hand stitching–specifically saddle stitching–is the most durable and aesthetically appealing kind of stitching. In this technique, an artisan uses two blunt needles attached to each of the two ends of a single thread. While stitching, he or she will pass the two needles through the same hole in order to create a knot. When the needles are pulled, the knot seals.

Machine stitching is a different story. In this technique, one needle with one thread is hooking to another thread at the bottom of the machine. As the needle moves forward, it creates a bunch of loops until you finish. That's why, when the one thread breaks, the whole thing unravels.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

In saddle stitching, even when one stitch falls apart (which is rare), the thread won't unravel. In fact, if you wanted to pull the thread out, you would have to sit down and grab an awl (or something with a pointy tip) in order to remove the stitches, one-by-one. It's a very difficult process and you would have to intentionally try to pick the stitches apart.

Image courtesy of 'The Art of Handsewing Leather' by Al Stohlman

3. Be Aware of Burnishing