We do not often think of a defense lawyer as someone who wars with her own client, but if it comes to that, Judy Clarke will go to war. Her latest, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, has admitted responsibility for detonating a bomb among spectators at the 2013 Boston Marathon, killing three people and severely maiming dozens. Federal prosecutors have asked for the death penalty. With Clarke in his corner, it is doubtful that Tsarnaev will ever be put to death for the crime, even if he gets it in his head that he wants to be—that his cause demands martyrdom. Clarke is on a mission bigger than Tsarnaev alone. She is at war with the state—in particular, with the state’s power to impose death. She calls the death penalty “legalized homicide.” Clarke has taken one notorious death-penalty case after another. There was Ted Kaczynski, the deadly Unabomber, now living out his days in a super-max prison in Colorado, and still furious with his onetime defense attorney (“Judy Clarke is a bitch on wheels and a sicko,” he wrote me); Susan Smith, who strapped her two small boys into car seats and then drove them into a lake and watched them drown; Eric Rudolph, the racist and Christian zealot who set off a bomb in Atlanta during the 1996 Summer Olympics as part of a spree that killed 2 people and injured 150 more; Zacarias Moussaoui, the al-Qaeda operative accused of helping to plan the September 11 attacks; and Jared Lee Loughner, who opened fire in a parking lot near Tucson, Arizona, in 2011, shooting Representative Gabrielle Giffords through the head and killing six others. Her client list is a catalogue of the worst. You might suspect a lawyer with a record like that to be a publicity seeker, but Clarke is the opposite. She shuns attention. She almost never gives interviews and does not stand before cameras and microphones on courthouse steps. She cultivates invisibility, right down to the muted way she dresses for court appearances. There is a deeper logic at work in her predilection to defend those who have achieved a monstrous notoriety. In every instance cited above, there is little mystery about the crime itself—and in every case, her clients have been convicted. But while prosecutors have tried to invoke the death penalty, none of her clients have been executed, even when, as with Kaczynski and Rudolph, they are actually proud of what they have done. It’s not unusual for some clients to resist Judy Clarke’s help. One, the white supremacist Buford O. Furrow Jr., who in 1999 walked into a Los Angeles Jewish Community Center and sprayed 70 shots, wounding five, before shooting and killing a mailman an hour later, reportedly threatened to kill her. Clarke defends people who do not wish to be defended, and who don’t have a prayer—clients who are not just dream candidates for the death penalty but who, in some cases, seem determined to embrace it. One case at a time, with whatever legal methods will work, she halts the march toward execution. Clarke makes her point not with stirring courtroom rhetoric or devastating legal arguments but by a process of relentless accretion, case by case, win by win. This is her cause. Because if the state cannot put these defendants to death, then how can it put anyone to death? Thirty-five executions took place in the United States in 2014 for crimes that form an inventory of human cruelty—and yet few were as willful and egregious as those committed by Judy Clarke’s clients. Meanwhile, Kaczynski is hard at work on his next book. Smith has advertised for pen pals from her cell. And Rudolph writes essays defending the bombing of abortion clinics, essays that his followers post on the Internet. © Jane Rosenberg/Reuter/Corbis. We are more willing to impose death when the killer is painted in monochrome—if we can define him or her by the horror of the crime. Many think this is just; that is what blame and punishment are about. But in rare public comments to the magazine of Washington and Lee University’s law school, where she has taught, Clarke argued that no person should be defined “by the worst moment, or worst day” of his life. She laboriously constructs a complex and sympathetic portrait of the accused, working with a far more varied palette, sketching out the good and the bad, unearthing the forces that drove a killer to the terrible moment, and insisting that judges and juries and prosecutors see the larger picture, weighing not just the crime but the whole person. She seeks not forgiveness but understanding. It takes only a small spark of it to decide against sentencing someone to death. Her record defending the indefensible speaks for itself. Among those who want capital punishment abolished in this country, Judy Clarke is the most effective champion in history. *****

David Kaczynski’s estimation of Clarke can be encapsulated in a single wordless gesture that took place as she stood beside his brother, Ted, in a Colorado courtroom on January 5, 1998. Ted was trying to fire Clarke. He wasn’t supposed to stand up or speak at that point in the hearing, but he jumped to his feet before Judge Garland Burrell Jr. and announced in his high-pitched voice, “Your Honor, I have something very important to say!” A bailiff shouted, “Sit down!” Ted had been legally cornered. Defending him was never going to be easy. The evidence was overwhelming. From the strict isolation of his small cabin in Lincoln, Montana, he had painstakingly built and mailed bombs that had killed 3 people and injured 23 others. Once a precocious math student with advanced degrees, Kaczynski had become one of the most deliberate killers in history. He had drawn up a detailed manifesto with numbered paragraphs that he blackmailed The Washington Post and The New York Times into publishing by threatening to continue killing if they did not. The tract was a far cry from incoherent, though it was certainly turgid and extreme, arguing that the steady march of modern technology, industry, and socialization was profoundly dehumanizing and was destroying the possibility of happiness. Here was a man who had carefully thought through his reasons for murder and then carried out his attacks with great deliberation over a period of years. His crimes fell well within at least two of the modern criteria for capital punishment: premeditation and multiple victims. His trial was almost certain to end in a sentence of death. He could avoid it by pleading guilty and accepting life in prison without hope of appeal, pardon, or parole, which he did not wish to do. Or he could proceed to trial and let Clarke and the other lawyers present the defense they had painstakingly prepared in the 21 months since his capture—an approach he had just realized would portray him as mentally ill. Kaczynski would later accuse Clarke of having deceived him about this until shortly before the trial. (Clarke did not respond to requests for an interview.) For this murderously proud man, something more than personal humiliation was at stake. An insanity defense would forever color his theories as madness. And, for him, his ideas were the important thing. They were why he had killed. He was prepared to die for them. None of this was explicitly spelled out in the courtroom, but from his seat in the front row Ted’s brother had pieced it together. David had mixed feelings about the trial. He himself had led the F.B.I. to Ted, and he was pleased that he had stopped his brother’s violence, but he dreaded the prospect that his principled act of betrayal would lead to Ted’s execution. “It must have been the most awkward and difficult moment for Judy, as well as Ted, because at this point the real issue for him was that he didn’t want the world to think he was crazy,” David recalled. “He thought there was meaning in what he did, and to be described as a crazy person would have taken all the meaning out of it. Of course, Judy as an attorney is trying to use her best influence with Ted to save his life, and here it was kind of falling apart at this critical moment. She could have been just really frustrated. She could have [felt], My client is taking himself down despite all my planning and best efforts to save his life.” There was a sidebar conference and then a further discussion inside the judge’s chambers, at which point Clarke effectively torpedoed Ted’s request to rid himself of his attorney. The judge did not want to further delay the trial, so he proposed a compromise: he would allow Ted to represent himself if his defense team would remain in the courtroom as his “advisers.” Clarke rejected this proposal. Such a trial would be a charade, she said. She and her team would not take part. Her refusal forced the question, and she must have known that doing so would scuttle her client’s wishes. Back in the courtroom, as Ted listened to Burrell deny his request, Clarke raised one hand and rested it gently on his shoulder. She knew, as David did, what a blow this was to him. Within hours he would attempt to hang himself in his cell. Two weeks later he grudgingly pleaded guilty—not to avoid the death penalty, but to avoid Clarke’s insanity defense. He is still complaining about it—that was the point of his letter to me. But it was Clarke’s kind gesture that impressed David. “Her instinct in that moment is not to turn a cold shoulder to him or express frustration or anger, all of which would have been understandable,” David said, “but it was to put her hand [on him]. To touch him.” By Mike Nelson/AFP/Getty Images. *****

Compassion, the thing David Kaczynski saw in her, cannot by itself explain Judy Clarke. There is a steel in her that we don’t ordinarily associate with kindness. In that interview with the law-school magazine, Clarke spoke of teaching students to act in the best interests of their client—and of their cause. She said, “The idea is that we stand between the power of the state and the individual.” If Clarke is compassionate and kind, she is also defiant and committed. This is no marshmallow. Which may not be immediately apparent to look at her. Says one old friend, “Her face has always reminded me of a sweet little forest animal,” with small, pinched features and deep-set eyes. She is surprisingly tall and lean, a lifelong runner. She wears her straight brown hair short and flat. She eschews makeup and for court has always dressed in a perfectly sensible female version of standard lawyerly attire, a conventionally cut wool suit, knee-length skirt and jacket, over a cotton shirt buttoned at the collar and a big, floppy, silk bow tie, which became her signature if, for many years, only because most women had stopped wearing them 20 years ago. Friends recently tried to talk her out of the bow ties, but she said she could not be bothered. Knowing exactly what to put on each morning saved her from having to think about it, she explained, but in Boston, during the early stages of the Tsarnaev trial, the bow tie was gone, replaced by a black turtleneck or simply an open collar. Her manner, like her choice of clothing, is deliberately understated. In photos she often looks pensive, even severe, eyes averted, mouth pursed, but her friends say she is the opposite in private: animated, with a warm sense of humor, someone who enjoys lifting a beer and telling a story, someone who laughs often. In court she is more earnest than clever. She impresses more with impeccable preparation and sincerity than with oratory. With judges and juries and before a classroom, her tone is conversational, genuine, and direct. She is, all in all, more inclined to listen than to speak. And yet argument is a big part of her character. Judy Clarke grew up one of four children in Asheville, North Carolina, part of an extended family of Republicans fond of spirited disputation. Parents, grandparents, and siblings would gather for supper around a large custom-built oak table, where opinions kept easy pace with the corn bread and gravy. Her parents, Harry and Patsy, sometimes hosted John Birch Society meetings in their living room. They were strong supporters of the late North Carolina senator Jesse Helms until their youngest son, Mark, died of AIDS in 1994 and Helms, who was hateful on the subject of homosexuality, spurned an appeal from Patsy for more research funding to combat the disease, expressing sympathy for her in a return letter but condemning Mark for having “played Russian roulette in his sexual activity.” Patsy wasn’t just hurt and angry. She co-founded an organization called “Mothers Against Jesse in Congress” that raised money and worked unsuccessfully to deny him re-election in 1997. “We debated a lot in the family,” Clarke told a reporter for The Spokesman-Review in 1996. “We were very vocal, and we always took positions. . . . From about the sixth or seventh grade, I wanted to become either the chief justice of the Supreme Court or Perry Mason. . . . One summer when I was young, my mother wanted to teach my sister [Candy] and I crocheting and the Constitution. She says that for my sister, the crocheting stuck, and for me, the Constitution stuck.” Judy and Candy had abandoned the family’s right-wing politics before they left home; they had both secretly voted for George McGovern in the 1972 presidential election. Judy migrated farther south to attend Furman University and then the University of South Carolina law school, and after graduating, in 1977, moved west to take a job with the public defender’s office in San Diego, where she and her husband, Thomas H. “Speedy” Rice, also a lawyer and law professor, had decided they wanted to live. New lawyers were asked to sign a “blood letter” when they started, promising to work 60-hour weeks, which for Clarke was apparently no stretch. Childless, she has earned a reputation through a long career for working heroically long hours and for pushing her staff with unrelenting, almost martial discipline. She would eventually lead the public defender’s office in San Diego, and later the one in Spokane, Washington; as boss she not only drove her staff hard at work but pushed them to adopt a regular fitness regimen away from it. Those so inclined were encouraged to join her at dawn for a daily four-mile run. “I like to fight,” Clarke told the Los Angeles Times in 1990, when, as the federal public defender for San Diego, she took a $50 fine for two misdemeanors related to smuggling aliens across the border all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court—United States v. German Munoz-Flores. In the end she lost the case, but she enjoyed the scrap. “I love the action,” she said. “I like the antagonism. I like the adversarial nature of the business. I love all of that. I think that’s the fun stuff. Especially when it’s over an issue that I think is of significance to all of us, and that’s our freedoms, our individual liberties.” To her, this devotion to civil liberties is deeply rooted in her conservative upbringing. Clarke bristled in that 1990 interview at being characterized as a liberal. “I don’t know but what my opinions have been the most conservative in the world,” she said. “What does it take to be an absolute supporter of what the Constitution says? That’s hardly liberal. I don’t smoke dope. I don’t snort cocaine. I’m not into drugs. I don’t like drugs. You associate that with a liberal view of a lawyer. I’m not into that. . . . Yes, I’m a defense lawyer, but I think I have very conservative values.” *****

Clarke first came to national attention in 1994, when she helped defend Susan Smith. After drowning her two small boys at the bottom of a South Carolina lake, Smith made up a story for police about having been carjacked by a “black man.” She aggressively maintained the fiction for nine days in television appearances, appealing for the boys’ release. Attorney Lesley “Lee” Coggiola met Clarke when she showed up in Columbia to help with Smith’s defense and needed a place to stay. Coggiola’s daughter had just left for college, so she offered up the vacated room. She also warned Clarke, “I have these teenage boys [four], and dogs [two] and cats [three].” “Sounds great—I’ll be there,” said Clarke. “So she moved in and lived with me off and on for that year,” Coggiola recalled. “And the kids loved her and the dogs loved her and the cats loved her, and her husband, Speedy, came periodically and stayed there, and the trial consultant came and stayed there, and various law clerks came and stayed there. It was quite a year.” In the middle of it, a student from Cornell University showed up at the front door when Clarke was home alone. Coggiola had promised to provide housing and then had forgotten about it. Clarke answered his knock. “Well, come on in,” she said. “We’ll find a place.” During the months she spent with Coggiola, Clarke got up every morning for her run and then would be gone all day. Many evenings she didn’t come back to the house until very late, as she and her team went about reconstructing their troubled client’s past. This involved long hours of listening sympathetically to her in the county lockup, eliciting her story in excruciating detail, and then tracking down family members, old friends, her first-grade teacher, her second-grade teacher, Girl Scout troop leaders, and more. There was plenty to discover: Smith’s biological father had committed suicide when she was six. She had been molested by her stepfather, an intimate relationship that had continued secretly into adult life and her marriage (a revelation that came as a terrible shock to Smith’s mother). Smith had twice attempted suicide as a teenager. There had been multiple infidelities and splits with her husband. There was an ongoing affair with yet another man. There may have been no doubt, once the fiction of a black kidnapper was abandoned, that Smith had drowned her two small boys, but the story grew ever more complex. How could anyone, Clarke argued, fail to see reasons why Smith had so cruelly lost her bearings? In the months before the trial, as Clarke lived upstairs in the busy Coggiola household with the teenagers and dogs and cats and law clerks, there were stories circulating about Smith and interviews with sympathetic family members. Bits and pieces of Smith’s troubled past found their way into reports and began to chip away at the image of Susan the Monster. They revealed something more like Susan the Victim. Tommy Pope tracked all of this closely. He was the county prosecutor, solicitor for the 16th Judicial Circuit (York and Union Counties), no rube but a good old boy nevertheless, a man with a viscous local drawl who was serving the community where he had been born and raised, and where he now helped teach Sunday school and coach Little League. Clarke and her co-counsel, David Bruck, took Pope to school. “I think I did an average job,” he told me, looking back with the perspective of two decades. “I guess people expected dueling banjos and the redneck sheriff. . . . The bar was set so low that when Tommy here jumped over it, they thought he was brilliant. But I am not a yin to their yang. I am not a death-penalty zealot. . . . There are plenty of prosecutors that—I hate to say it is like a bloodlust, but you know what I mean: they got to get the death penalty, got to get the death penalty. And I saw it as part of my job, almost like a soldier. Just because I have to go kill does not mean I relish it. But again, I am not backing down from my duty, either.” The way Pope saw it, if the Smith boys’ father had drowned them, or if the story about a black carjacker had been true, then his community would have howled for the executioner. So was he supposed to go easy on Susan Smith because she was a pretty, young, white woman? How would that look? Besides, he saw Smith as a stone-cold killer, a promiscuous young wife who had betrayed her husband and her mother, who had sized up her children as obstacles to her future happiness with another man, and so she had killed them and then constructed an elaborate lie—acted out vividly in public—to cover her tracks. Pope was not fully prepared for the complete focus and determination of Clarke and Bruck. In retrospect, he sees that he was outmaneuvered from the beginning, in ways large and small. “They really start way ahead of the courtroom,” he said. “I was ready to try the case by January. In other words, three months after it happened, I was pretty much ready to go to trial. And they made some motions to say that they were not particularly ready, and we ended up trying it that summer.” In retrospect, the delays proved critical for remaking the image of the accused. In the interim, Pope said, he felt honor-bound by his position not to comment on the case. Susan’s family members did not feel so bound. “I cannot answer publicly what Susan’s mama says on Dateline the week before the trial,” he said. He was surprised when Clarke did not ask the judge to move the trial from Union County, and he didn’t seek a change of venue himself, only to realize later that nowhere had all the sympathetic details of Smith’s life story been more avidly consumed than at home, by the community that would deliver up her jury. He did not contest the defense request to bar cameras from the courtroom, fearing that if he argued for them he would be accused of grandstanding and trying to further his political career. (Pope has since been elected to the state legislature.) Looking back, he would have loved for there to have been cameras to catch how Smith giggled and played tic-tac-toe during the trial breaks, only to resume sniffling into a tissue when the jury was ushered back in. Once the trial began, there was no way for the death-seeking prosecutor to compete for geniality with Clarke’s principled compassion, and she wasted no opportunity to make the contrast plain. “I think she and David probably played a little good-cop/bad-cop kind of thing,” Pope told me. “In other words, he was kind of softer-spoken; she was more aggressive. Like when she would make statements, she would come over and kind of bang on our table and look us in the eye, all for dramatic effect I am sure.” Coggiola remembers a moment in the trial when Pope, whose disdain for Smith was palpable, and who can be caustic, said or snorted something dismissive as a defense witness grew weepy on the stand. Clarke turned and glared at him. “Shame on you,” she said. “I just remember us doing the glare-down at each other,” he recalled. Clarke made an impassioned plea to the jury on Smith’s behalf, according to the 1996 Spokesman-Review story, arguing, “This is not a case about evil. . . . This is a case about despair and sadness.” She conceded that Smith had made bad choices and bad decisions: “Her choices were irrational and her decisions were tragic. She made a horrible, horrible decision to be at that lake that night. She made that decision with a confused mind and a heart without hope. . . . [But] confusion is not evil, and hopelessness is not malice.” In the end, Pope failed to convince the jury to impose the death penalty. And he is not surprised he failed. He respects Clarke’s skills as a lawyer but calls her the thing he says he is not: a “zealot.” She brought a level of determination he could not match, and a willingness to do whatever it took to save her client. Smith was sentenced to life in prison, which, Pope is quick to point out, will not actually mean life in prison, because under South Carolina law she will be eligible for parole in 2024. There were such hard feelings in South Carolina over the carpetbagger defender’s success in this case, Clarke’s Carolina roots notwithstanding, that some in the state legislature sought to ban payments to out-of-town lawyers in such cases. Clarke promptly returned her court-awarded fee—$82,944. By Lane Turner/The Boston Globe via Getty Images. *****

Judy Clarke spoke in April 2013 at a small legal symposium in Los Angeles. She declined to answer questions from the audience and, according to a news report, was “reticent” throughout. But she referred back to the Susan Smith case, noting that it was the reason she had been “sucked into the black hole, the vortex” of death-penalty cases. “I got a dose of understanding human behavior, and I learned what the death penalty does to us,” she said. Clarke argued that most of those who commit heinous acts “have suffered from serious severe trauma, unbelievable trauma. We know that from brain research. Many suffer from severe cognitive development issues that affect the core of their being.” In other words, “most” of those who commit these terrible crimes, the worst of the worst, are not evil; they are sick. She is not alone in thinking this way. Dr. Dorothy Otnow Lewis, a professor of psychiatry at New York University and Yale, has been studying death-row inmates for years. In her 1998 book, Guilty by Reason of Insanity, and in medical journals since, she argues that on death row a history of brain trauma and mental illness are constants. One study of 15 death-row inmates that she conducted with Dr. Jonathan H. Pincus, chief of neurology at the Veterans Administration Medical Center in Washington, found that every one of them had suffered head injuries in childhood or had received brain injuries in violent assaults. Her work does not dwell on some obscure scholarly fringe, either: it has been cited by the Supreme Court three times, most notably in a 1991 dissent by Justice Thurgood Marshall to a decision that allowed the execution of a brain-damaged killer named Ricky Ray Rector. The insanity defense has been around for many centuries and has long turned on whether the accused was capable of understanding what he was doing. A person who killed while sleepwalking, say, or in the grip of a profound hallucination, would be innocent of having knowingly committed a crime. A mind lost to dementia or retardation may well be incapable of telling the difference between right and wrong, or realistically weighing the consequences of a decision. Over the centuries, criminal justice has embraced ever wider reasons to avoid execution. The definition of “not guilty by reason of insanity” was broadened in the 20th century to include crimes that grew out of mental illness—in other words, acts that would not have been committed were it not for the underlying pathology (a schizophrenic, say, goaded to kill by the voices in his head, or any deranged soul whose tormented truth somehow justifies the taking of a life). In her Los Angeles talk, Clarke seemed to expand the definition further when she suggested that the most terrible killings are themselves an expression of deep mental damage: insanity is inherent in the crime, because only someone with “severe cognitive development issues” would commit it. We cannot judge her clients, she argues, without fully inhabiting their heads. To comprehend the affliction is to understand the crime. So she had Kaczynski’s tiny cabin disassembled and shipped to Colorado, and had he gone to trial, she planned to have it reassembled so that jurors could literally walk around inside her client’s starkly isolated home, if not his mind. The New York Times reported at the end of 2013 that the death penalty in the United States was in “broad decline,” a pattern some believe reflects a growing societal rejection of the practice. Only eight states put one or more people to death last year. Gallup polls show that since the early 1990s there have been both a gradual fall in support of execution and a steady rise in opposition, but nevertheless, a majority of Americans still favor execution for the most serious crimes. Thirty-two states still have capital punishment on their books, though the number is shrinking. Death-penalty activists like Clarke have raised the bar so high that many states are opting for purely practical reasons not to pursue the death penalty, citing the enormous and mounting expense of contesting seemingly endless appeals, and the difficulty in establishing a “humane” method of putting the condemned to death. But it’s doubtful, even if we stop executing people in the United States, that we will settle the deeper question: Are those who kill sick, or are they simply evil? If there is an opposite number to Judy Clarke, it would be Jacabed Rodriguez-Coss, formerly of the U.S. Justice Department’s Capital Case Unit, which, among other things, provides help for U.S. Attorneys who pursue death-penalty prosecutions. When I suggested to her that if Clarke was the Angel of Life, she herself might be considered the Angel of Death, she was justifiably horrified. She could not imagine the side of justice being so characterized. Prosecutors believe their job goes beyond the defense attorney’s; their responsibility is to the entire community, to see that justice is done. The question of evil versus illness cleanly divides the legal community. It even divides the U.S. Justice Department, where today prosecutors such as Rodriguez-Coss, who professionally supports the death penalty, may find themselves at odds with colleagues and supervisors who are ambivalent about it, if not outright opposed. Those who support capital punishment are quick to acknowledge that some defendants are sick enough to lack the ability to appreciate the consequences of their actions. But that hardly includes a killer like Kaczynski, who brought exceptional intelligence and deliberation to his murders, and who was quite ready to step forward and take credit for them once he was caught. Here was a man who had freely chosen wrong over right, who had with immense deliberation assigned greater importance to his own objectives than to the very lives of those targeted by his mail bombs. Indeed, in his journals, Kaczynski gloated over the “success” of his murderous mailings, which he would read about in newspapers. If the act itself were proof of insanity, then no one could be executed, which is, of course, Clarke’s intent. It allows us to believe that all people are essentially good, and do very bad things only when their brains misfire. If this is true, then it directly contradicts our primary cultural traditions, if not common sense. Christianity and traditional Judaism teach that all men are born sinful and need redemption. Humanists regard civilization as the remedy for our savage nature. The impulse to regard horrible criminals as “crazy” is common enough, but from a prosecutor’s perspective it’s also a cop-out. If punishing crime is a solemn social responsibility, then the worst crimes deserve the worst penalty. If you believe perfectly sane men are capable of doing horrible things, then the problem isn’t always illness. Sometimes it’s evil. *****