It's not easy to be a good driver. I've been driving for decades, I've been behind the wheel of many, many different vehicles, and I'm constantly trying to figure out if my skills are up to snuff. But it's even harder to be a good defensive driver. You all know what defensive driving is: it's based on the notion that the roadways are inherently dangerous places and you as the mindful driver must be vigilant about threats, so that you can avoid trouble. It used to be easier to embrace defensive driving. We had far fewer technological distractions in our cars, and vehicles were less isolating. You could feel the road, the engine, the brakes. The actual physics that you were exposed to — operating a shell of metal and glass, carrying a tankful of a highly explosive and flammable substance for fuel, hurtling down a freeway at 60 miles per hour — were in your face. Advancements in the automobile, from noise-isolation to airbags, have made it easier to tune out. But defensive driving hasn't gone away. Here are five good ways to get better at it. View As: One Page Slides

Use your eyes. Driving is visual — in fact, one of the most visually demanding activities a person can engage it. You have in every modern car three mirrors. Use them obsessively. As you drive, your central focus should be on the road ahead of you, but you should also constantly scan your mirrors. I try to retain a short-term mental picture of the activity around me. Where is that semi-truck? That pickup? That guy on the motorcycle? That dude who's running 20 miles over the speed limit? By doing this, you can file away your fellow motorists and their vehicle types and run a sort of background predictive algorithm so that you can manage your own on-road decision-making better.

Know your vehicle. I'm fortunate in that I get to sample a lot of different types of cars, trucks, and SUVs. But as a result I'm also deeply aware of the capabilities of different vehicles. I'm not going to drive a Honda Accord the same way I would a Porsche 911 or Ferrari 488 GTB. Your car is a package. The engine, transmissions, brakes, and tires combine to form a whole. If you have mass-market brakes and regular old radials, you shouldn't be blasting around like you have a trackworthy sports car that was engineered to go hard. You should also be aware of the safety features that your car has on board. For example, a lot of newer vehicles will warn you of other vehicles on your flanks, let you know if you're nodding off, and then buzz the steering wheel if you're slipping out of your lane.

Don't tailgate. The number-one problem I see in everyday driving, particularly in the traffic-clogged Northeast, is tailgating. On a highway, you want a lot of distance between you and the car in front on you. At highway speeds, you will need the space to execute evasive maneuvers to avoid an accident, or engage the anti-lock brakes in your cars to prevent rear-ending the vehicle ahead of you. So how much space? I like at least a semi-truck length, which is about three car lengths. In stop-and-go traffic, where rear-ending is common, I sometimes keep at least a couple of car lengths between myself and the other guy. I catch criticism for this, but I've also seen horrific accidents happen right in front of me on several occassions. I want a BIG margin for error.

Be smooth. The legendary race-car driver Jackie Stewart was a smoothness obsessive. His advice: Put a bowl of water on your dashboard. You should be able to drive around without spilling a drop. I grew up in the pre-cupholder era, when if you wanted a drink in your car you had to learn to to drive in a way that wouldn't lead to spills. You do this by finessing and caressing your ride. You don't punch it. You don't slam the brakes. You accelerate and decelerate in a smoothly linear fashion, and you keep your eyes on the road ahead to plan your decisions. You remain ever-aware of how hard your engine is running and what the road beneath your tires feels like. You minimize steering inputs (and you keep both hands on the wheel as often as possible). You float the car. In a nutshell, you appreciate that you're engaged in a demanding cognitive and sensory experience, and you allow your body and mind to blend with the machine. You do this with a $100,000 sports car and $20,000 compact.

Respect the speed limit. Modern cars have too much horsepower. This means that a budget A-to-B ride can crank up the speed to levels that would have impressed a race-car driver in the 1950s. Hitting 65 mph is largely effortless. Routinely exceeding the speed limit is another aggressive driving habit that I see all the time. Drivers weave in and out of traffic, running 20 or 30 miles over the limit. They pass in all lanes, not just the far left passing lane. Don't do this. If you want to get to your destination safely and on time, stay close to the posted limit (driving way too slowly, by the way, is just as dangerous), and strive to achieve a steady cruising speed on the highway. Your fuel economy will be better, you'll inflict less wear on your brakes and tires, and you'll be far less likely to be responsible for a crash.