I put out a little “SOS” of sorts on Facebook last week asking you guys what type of baked treats you’d like to see on the blog before Christmas. Though I got a lot of replies the most common theme was gingerbread, and specifically to make it gluten-free and vegan. When you talk, I listen! I got to work that same day and perfected a recipe by morning. Friends, I present to you both gluten-free AND vegan gingerbread men!

This batter is seriously decadent looking, no? But it’s deceptive as it actually has plenty of wholesome gluten-free grains like buckwheat, brown rice, and oat flour. It also includes one flax egg and a healthy heaping of molasses, which we all know is good for the soul. A few other basic ingredients and we have 1-bowl magic on our hands. Next? Chill, roll, and stamp – my favorite part.

These little guys take a little tender care in the stamping process but once you get them on the tray you’re home free. And the good news is, if you’d rather not mess with cutting them into shapes, you can just roll them into little balls and bake them into some of the BEST, crispy-on-the-outside, tender-on-the-insider ginger cookies I’ve ever had. No joke!

Look at that stack of gingerbread goodness. These guys are:

Crispy on the edges

Tender and slightly chewy in the center

Packed with ginger, cinnamon and molasses flavor

Seriously addictive

& Begging to be frosted.

I can fix that…

For my frosting I went with a simple mix of powdered sugar, melted vegan butter, and a dash of almond milk. This is the perfect and most simple frosting for these little dudes.

OK, I lied. Stamping them out is my SECOND favorite step. Icing them is my first.

I hope you enjoy these cookies! Make them for friends, for yourself, or with the little kiddos in your life. They will have a ball dotting on buttons and faces and tiny gingerbread man shoes. Maybe more fun than you (but I doubt it).

Once they’re all dressed, package them up and send them to far away friends or ones just across the street. These would also be adorable individually wrapped in cellophane and tied onto presents. Just sayin’. Your family would be seriously impressed.

And before I go, can I just say that making them into little rounds is my preferred way to go because although they aren’t as adorable, they taste like gingerbread MAGIC IN THE MOUTH. Get you some. Happy holidays, friends!