Blue — it's a versatile color that in its darkest hues is dramatic and moody. It can be bold, uplifting and energizing. It can mix with other hues to create stunning teals, turquoises, dusty bluish grays and more. Barely there, it's a hint of color that soothes and softens. Want to pick a blue for a wall or furniture paint project this weekend and know it'll look amazing? Check out these 20 real-life examples of blues used in house tours — including paint names!

Of course, every home is different, with its own light and furnishings that can affect the look of a paint color (in other words, still test out any colors you plan on using!) but this list of 20 successful blues is a great place to start if you were thinking of adding a splash of blue hue to a wall or furniture piece.

1. Benjamin Moore Polo Blue on Mark's Comfortable Contemporary master bedroom accent wall.

2. Benjamin Moore Old Navy in the entryway of Bianca & Craig's Moody Glam Apartment.

3. Behr Quiet Storm in the bedroom in Tim's Cabinet of Curiosities.

4. Glidden Wrought Iron on the guest bedroom accent wall in Erik & Paul's Happy Los Feliz Home.

5. Ralph Lauren Club Navy in the bedroom of Lucie & Chris' Spanish Colonial in the Hollywood Hills.

BOLD & BRIGHT

1. Glidden Belizean Blue in the kitchen in Emily & Ian's Mod and Musical Space.

2. Benjamin Moore Stunning in the master bedroom of Brian & Brad's Artfully Modern Apartment.

3. ACE Waterflow (A40-4) in Melyssa & Ted's Colorful Carriage House living room.

4. Benjamin Moore Deep Ocean in the library/media room of Lucie & Chris' Spanish Colonial in the Hollywood Hills.

5. They didn't mention the exact name of this blue in Lori and Jeromy's Stylish Family Home, but Sherwin Williams Impromptu looks close.

TEAL & TURQUOISE

1. Behr Indian Ocean in Eden's Teal Treasure nursery.

2. Ralph Lauren Baltic Blue in the kids room in Lucie & Chris' Spanish Colonial in the Hollywood Hills.

3. Dutch Boy Tree Frog in Chris & Colleen's Small, Hip Family Home.

4. Benjamin Moore Electric Blue in Caitlin's Art Deco Apartment with a Parisian Flair bedroom

5. Benjamin Moore Surf Blue in Leila & Buff's Beautiful Beach Abode.

BARELY-THERE BLUES

1. Farrow & Ball Dix Blue in Charlie's Charming Townhouse.

2. Benjamin Moore Pale Periwinkle cut with Chantilly Lace in Kirsten & Chris' Timeless Style.

3. Sherwin Williams Drizzle in the living room and dining room of Thomas and Mitchell's Bougie Boho Style.

4. Custom Glidden blend to create the perfect Tiffany Blue in Emily & Ian's Mod and Musical Space.

5. Benjamin Moore Summer Shower in the guest bedroom of Marianna & Micah's Slices of the South.

Have you ever come across the best blue wall paint color for your home or a home project? Share the paint color name in the comments!