Back in the summer of 2013, before he became perhaps the biggest bust in the history of the National Football League, before the social-media firestorms and the mysterious rehab, before his hard-partying ways put him on TMZ more than on ESPN, Johnny Manziel already worried his parents. A scrambling, showboating quarterback with a knack for leading his Texas A&M team to fourth-quarter victories, 20-year-old “Johnny Football” had won the Heisman Trophy, college football’s highest honor, five months before—the first freshman to do so—and become an international celebrity, partying with Justin Bieber and Drake and appearing on David Letterman and other talk shows. He had come seemingly out of nowhere, an unheralded kid from the Texas Hill Country town of Kerrville, where he played football the way kids do in the backyard: unscripted, improvisational, just dodging defender after defender until the inevitable Hail Mary pass into the end zone for a touchdown. But Manziel was no ordinary backyard player. In the Southeastern Conference, the nation’s toughest, he set an all-time record for total offense and led the Aggies to the most electrifying regular-season victory in recent memory, a jaw-dropping upset of national champion Alabama, then on to a Cotton Bowl Classic win against Oklahoma. In the four short months of a single season, he became that rarest of things: an overnight legend. It was a lot to handle for a small-town kid, and Manziel didn’t cope well. Like many college students, he enjoyed his beer. As his parents, Paul and Michelle Manziel, admitted to ESPN magazine at the time, they worried his drinking was out of hand. What Manziel’s parents didn’t say, though, was what truly scared them was drug use. Johnny had been dogged by rumors of it almost as soon as he came on the national scene, but this account, offered by members of his close circle of family and friends, is the first to detail their dramatic attempts to curtail what even now they euphemistically call his love for “partying.” Left, by Joe Robbins/Getty Images; Right, by Michael Prengler/Cal Sport Media/zumapress.com. It was that June when his parents realized the severity of the problem—this according to Johnny’s longtime best friend, Steven Brant, who at the time lived with him in an off-campus house in College Station. It was there that Michelle found drug paraphernalia. “She came into the house and found some pipes, and she totally freaked out,” remembers Brant. “They moved him out. It happened so fast. I was out playing basketball, and when I came back Johnny was gone, and so was all of his furniture.” The Manziels, who declined to be interviewed, weren’t the only ones concerned about drug use. So was Johnny’s second close friend, Nate Fitch, something of a straight arrow who had dropped out of college to manage Johnny’s affairs. It was “Uncle Nate” (who declined to comment for this story) who handled the reporters, stiff-armed photographers, and dragged Johnny out of parties before things got messy. “Ever since the Heisman, Nate was hinting about drugs, getting it to stop,” says Brant, who admits to using drugs himself. “He was acting all concerned, because Johnny was his meal ticket.” “Nate was the key—he was the one who had Johnny’s back, who kept him out of trouble,” says a friend more sympathetic to Fitch. “He was the only one in that group who wasn’t using drugs.”

The Manziels questioned Fitch about the extent of the problem at the house Johnny and Brant shared on Pershing Avenue. Fitch, whose father was a drug therapist, told them what he knew. According to people familiar with the details, marijuana was in regular use at the house, as was the prescription tranquilizer Xanax, a popular party drug often ground up, snorted, and chased with alcohol; MDMA, known as “Molly,” a form of Ecstasy; and, occasionally, cocaine. Some in the family came to blame Johnny’s introduction to drugs on Brant, whose Twitter feed is sprinkled with references to Xanax. I asked Brant about his drug use. “I don’t deny it,” he said. “But it’s not like this was some kind of Amy Winehouse scene.” Was it fair, I asked, to say he seldom declined Xanax or Molly if offered? Brant responded with a grin: “That’s a fair way to put it.” All during Manziel’s second season at A&M, as he planned to enter the N.F.L. draft, Fitch pestered Johnny to cut back his partying. “Nate had so many confrontations with him,” says a friend. “He saw Johnny just wasn’t focused on the future the way he should be. He was focused on, you know, these other things. Nate kept saying, ‘This is not the way an N.F.L. quarterback can be.’ ” From Splash News.

It all came to a head at a meeting Johnny convened that November, late in college-football season, six months before the draft: Present were Johnny, Nate, Steve, and several others. Fitch made an impassioned argument that the partying, especially the drug use, had to end, or at least slow, if Manziel was to succeed as a pro. “I know, you’re right,” Johnny said with a sigh. “Nathan had all the best intentions, we told him. He wanted Johnny to stop it all, to live that straight lifestyle,” says someone who was at the meeting. “He blamed us. He accused us of influencing Johnny. He should have known better. Nathan had been there from day one. He knew that wasn’t going to change.” “I sat there and didn’t say a thing,” says Brant, “and then Johnny said to me, ‘Are you going to say anything?’ And then I really lost it.” Brant recalls he attacked Fitch as a liar and a hypocrite who had partied with them at times. “Steve was basically mad that Nate ratted them out to Johnny’s parents,” says one friend. “And Johnny got super-mad at Steven for being so disrespectful to Nate. He really jumped all over his case.” Afterward, Fitch thought the problem was solved—Johnny was profusely apologetic and solicitous—which came as a relief. Fitch was already in informal talks with Johnny’s lawyers to sign on as his manager. Johnny was due to start professional training in San Diego that January, and Fitch had big plans to launch his young star’s career once they arrived. But then a funny thing happened. “Johnny suddenly goes to San Diego, and Nate wasn’t on the plane,” says a friend. “No one ever told Nate he was [let go], no one. Suddenly he just wasn’t there anymore.” A person close to Manziel says Fitch’s objections had nothing to do with the decision to part ways. “At that point Johnny had started working with professional agents and it just didn’t make sense to keep Nate as part of that professional group, but they’ve remained friends.” Few would attribute Manziel’s disastrous N.F.L. career entirely to the loss of “Uncle Nate,” but the implosion of Johnny’s college support system did little to improve his focus, commitment, or performance while playing intermittently for the Cleveland Browns during 2014 and 2015. In two years Manziel went from college football’s most sensational star to being out of the game altogether. The Browns cut him in March of this year. Already, “Johnny Football” is being compared to Ryan Leaf, the college quarterback who famously battled Peyton Manning to be the N.F.L.’s No. 1 pick in 1999. Picked second, Leaf was a flop and eventually ended up jailed on drug charges. “To me, Manziel is the biggest bust of all time, worse than Leaf,” says the noted N.F.L. columnist Mike Freeman. “There was so much more hype for Johnny. But it wasn’t just that he was overmatched physically. He was lazy. He didn’t study. The guy is out of the N.F.L. today because he refused to work at his craft.” Today, Manziel is officially unemployed, and has been living in Los Angeles with an old pal and popping up regularly on TMZ. In June the Web site published a Snapchat posting that showed what appeared to be packets of suspicious powder being held by a woman who said she was staying in Mexico in the same house as Manziel; Manziel denied they were his. His father, Paul, who has publicly labeled his son “a druggie,” has made headlines by suggesting Johnny is in dire straits. “I truly believe that if they can’t get him help, he won’t live to see his twenty-fourth birthday,” he told The Dallas Morning News last February. Other family and friends say such grim predictions are overblown, that Paul’s statements are just an attempt to scare his son straight. “We FaceTimed Johnny Sunday, and he seemed like his old self again,” his uncle Harley Hooper told me in July. “He had his stuff more together than I’d seen in a long, long time.” Still, there is a lingering sense that Manziel’s story will not end well. More than one observer I contacted refused to comment, not wanting to inflame the situation. “I’m sorry. I’m not sure I want to continue to pile on,” a former Cleveland sportswriter named Kevin Jones e-mailed me. “He might die.” By Elsa/Getty Images. The Kickoff

For years Paul and Michelle Manziel joked about what a strange toddler Johnny had been, “funny-looking, with this huge triangular head, constantly running around the house at a thousand miles an hour,” as someone who knows the stories tells me. He banged into so much furniture his forehead would be bloody, which never slowed him, “just this big ol’ bloody head running around the house so hard and he just would never stop.” Two things the family knew about Johnny early on: he couldn’t stop moving, and he was a born athlete. As depicted in a Texas Monthly cover story, they say he could drive golf balls at the age of 2 and could beat adults by the time he was 10. In junior baseball he hit so many home runs they had to put a net atop the fence to save the balls. Growing up in Tyler, in East Texas, he was hunting or fishing or racing on Jet Skis when he wasn’t on the athletic field. He tired out all his friends. “Johnny has always been manic, and Michelle says they suspected he had A.D.D., or something, and in high school wondered if they should put him on medication,” one friend says. “They decided not to, because it was so much a part of who he was. But that could explain a lot, the fidgetiness, the impulse-control problems. He has to be doing something every three seconds. The times he gets in trouble are the times he has nothing to do.” Like many younger people, Manziel had two contrasting personalities: the polite, yes-sir-no-ma’am side he showed his parents and their friends, and a hell-raising side he shared mostly with his pals, the side you can still see in the social-media photos of him shouting and laughing and spraying nightclubs with champagne. “NATE WAS . . . WILLING TO TELL JOHNNY THE TRUTH . . . THAT’S WHY HE IS NOT AROUND ANYMORE.” The part of Johnny that remained constant was a hypercompetitive streak that apparently runs through the extended Manziel clan, one of the more prominent families in Tyler. His great-grandfather Bobby Joe, who emigrated from the Middle East at the age of five and became one of East Texas’s richer oilmen, was a boxer and football player. Johnny’s grandfather Norman “Big Paul” was a Golden Gloves boxing champion, a national boat-racing champion, and, like several of the Manziels, raised champion fighting roosters. But none were as competitive as Johnny. Every round of golf, every day of fishing, every everything, had to be a contest. “You never see Johnny happier than when he’s winning at something,” says one longtime friend, “and you never see him lower than when he’s lost. And it’s always one or the other.” While some in the Manziel clan have been rich, little of that wealth trickled down to Johnny’s family. His mom sells real estate, and his father is a car salesman, who took a new job in Kerrville when Johnny was in seventh grade. That’s when Manziel’s athletic gifts blossomed. He wasn’t the biggest kid, five feet ten inches, but at Kerrville’s Tivy High School he hit .416 on the baseball field while breaking every school passing record on the football team. In his senior year he averaged 440 yards of total offense per game, and he scored an astounding 75 touchdowns. Though his size made some people doubt the feasibility of a major college career, Johnny was actively recruited and decided to go to Texas A&M. Not a lot of Kerrville kids went to A&M, but during his freshman year, in which he was “redshirted” (made to sit out the year to preserve a year of eligibility), Manziel formed an inseparable trio with two of them: Nate Fitch, small, dark, and intense, and Steven Brant, a happy-go-lucky sort who had been one of Johnny’s receivers at Tivy. “It was always Nate, Johnny, and Steve, and they didn’t live by anyone’s rules but their own,” says a longtime friend. “We all love Entourage—we were just like on the show,” Brant, dressed in a T-shirt and an A&M cap, told me. He comes off as a thin, gentle slacker, with wide gaps in his teeth. From the beginning, the struggle that marked Manziel’s career—whether to party or concentrate on football—was embodied by Brant and Fitch. Fitch is a Christian whose family owned a drug-treatment center; he is wholly conversant in the language of treatment and recovery. Brant’s parents, by contrast, were addicts who actually met in a drug-treatment facility. Because they were unable to raise him, he was unofficially adopted at age five by the owners of his day-care center, who raised him as their own. When Brant’s adoptive mother died, in November of his freshman year at A&M, the Manziels, who had moved nearby to be close to Johnny, took Brant into the family. When he needed someone to talk to, he drove over to Harley Hooper’s clothing store, where Michelle was working. He began spending Christmases with the family rather than returning to Kerrville. “Paul and Michelle took him in,” says Hooper, “but they didn’t really know what all was going on, because had they known, they wouldn’t have let him get so close to the family—I think that’s pretty clear. There’s no question Johnny and Steven were not good for each other.” Brant shakes his head at the idea he was a bad influence on Manziel. “We partied together, yeah, but all this is my fault?” he says. “Let me tell you, no one tells Johnny what to do.” By Frank Jansky/Icon SportsWire DCT/Newscom.

That first year, when Manziel was largely anonymous on campus, the three pals often used fake IDs to get into College Station bars. Manziel and Brant were the hardest drinkers. Their first problem, a serious one, came the summer after freshman year, in June 2012. Even as rumors swirled that Manziel might be named A&M’s starting quarterback, he and Brant were arrested following an altercation with a man outside a bar. Manziel’s booking photo, in which he was shirtless, caused a sensation in Texas. “I was so blackout drunk, I don’t remember what happened. Neither of us do,” says Brant, smiling. “I woke up in a cell. Johnny was on the ground, losing his shit, throwing up all over himself. That’s why he isn’t wearing a shirt in the mug shot. I asked this cop, you know, ‘What is the actual case? What did we do?’ [He said], ‘Well, you called this black guy the n-word.’ [I said], ‘I did? And that’s illegal?’ Yeah, that was all me.” Brant says that the furor over the arrest scared Manziel straight for a time. “That was a big wake-up call for him,” Brant goes on. Re-energized, Manziel led the Aggies to an 11–2 season, the historic upset win over top-ranked Alabama, and the victory in the Cotton Bowl. Afterward, Manziel basked in his new celebrity. Fitch would eventually drop out of school and follow Manziel everywhere. “Nate was like Johnny’s shadow, making sure no one took his picture, always ready to hand him a water bottle and hustle him out when things got dicey,” says a friend. It was in those first weeks after the Heisman that Fitch began bugging Manziel and Brant about the drugs. Little changed until that summer, when Johnny’s mother found the pipes at their house on Pershing Avenue. “The family acted like we were running a drug house,” says Brant. “That’s what Nate was telling them. That’s not true. We weren’t doing anything any other college kid doesn’t do.” The family’s crusade against drugs continued into the next football season, climaxing in a confrontation between Michelle and Johnny. Desperate to escape fans and well-wishers, Johnny had begun bunking on his pal Colton Oehler’s couch at a house on Carter Creek Parkway. One afternoon, while he was refusing to answer calls and texts from his parents, his mother walked in unannounced. “They always thought he was off doing drugs,” says a person who was there that day. “No one was doing anything except homework, I swear. She got very angry. Johnny was telling her to get away from him.” Michelle left, but that wasn’t the end of it. According to the person in the house, she tracked down the home’s owner, the parents of another student. “She told the other parents we were sitting around smoking dope, which was wrong,” this person says. “We understand her concern, but this was too much.”

The person whose warnings could be seen and heard by others—often and loudly—was Nate Fitch. According to two of Fitch’s friends, the turning point came when Fitch’s father, the drug therapist, sat his son down and told him that by “protecting” Johnny at bars and clubs he wasn’t actually helping him. He was enabling him. After that, friends say, Uncle Nate began openly confronting Manziel. “Nate told him, ‘Look what you’re doing—Tom Brady doesn’t do this stuff,’ ” says someone who heard him. “ ‘Brett Favre doesn’t do this. Joe Montana doesn’t do this. I don’t know any N.F.L. quarterbacks who do. Oh wait, Ryan Leaf did. You’re my best friend, and I love you. One day you’ll thank me.’ ” Once it became clear Johnny had no intention of cutting back his partying, friends say, Fitch told the Manziels what his father had taught him. He said Johnny was “sick” and informally diagnosed him with “substance-abuse disorder [S.A.D.].” With the disorder, Fitch warned the family, a person will give up almost anything, even something they love—in this case football—rather than stop using drugs. “Nate was the only friend willing to tell Johnny the truth,” says a friend, “and that’s why he is not around anymore.” (“I think there are always going to be versions of people’s school years, but I would remind you that the facts are Johnny was the best and most exciting player in college football at the time,” says Manziel’s spokesperson. “This doesn’t suggest a kid with issues partying but an athlete with discipline, determination, and focus.”) After his second season, Manziel swore he would leave his bad-boy image behind for the N.F.L. “I was a kid who made some goofball decisions,” he told reporters. “That’s been part of my journey. Maybe it’s part of the whole Johnny Football deal that I’m trying to get away from.” In private, however, little had changed. By the time Manziel left for San Diego in January, a member of his inner circle says, “he was out of control. Totally out of control.” Quarterback Sneak

The pro scouts weren’t big on Manziel, in large part because he wasn’t very big himself; at under six feet, he would be among the smallest quarterbacks in the N.F.L., where height is valued to throw over tall defensive linemen’s raised arms. Worse, Manziel excelled at A&M by playing “streetball,” scrambling free of pass rushers until he found an open receiver, something the N.F.L.’s much faster defensive players wouldn’t allow. N.F.L. teams wanted “pocket” passers, who stay put as they prepare to throw, quickly reading the defense to find the open man. Some analysts thought Manziel would go in the first round; others were dismissive, saying he was a fourth- or fifth-rounder at best. With Steven Brant at his side at Manhattan’s Madison Square Garden, Manziel was drafted by the Cleveland Browns with the 22nd pick of the first round. His rookie contract with the Browns, in 2014, was a four-year, $8.2 million deal that included $6.7 million in guaranteed money. According to ProFootballTalk, most of the guaranteed money came from a $4.3 million signing bonus. Johnny and Steve ran out and immediately bought all the Browns hats and jerseys they could carry. “It really wasn’t until the flight home that it sunk in, you know—it’s Cleveland,” Brant says. By Tim Warner/Cal Sport Media/Alamy Stock Photo. The Browns had been a losing franchise for years, and a dysfunctional one, with a rookie head coach named Mike Pettine, whose lack of enthusiasm for Manziel from the start was evident. But the team had a new president who had sworn to make the Browns “relevant” again, and no one appeared on SportsCenter more than Johnny Football. Manziel’s first two months as a Brown were marked by a series of party photos that received wide circulation on the Internet: there was Johnny, shirtless, posing with bikini-clad women in a nightclub in Las Vegas; Johnny aboard a giant inflatable swan, chugging champagne from a bottle in an Austin dance club’s swimming pool; and, most infamous of all, Johnny rolling a dollar bill into a small tube. In Cleveland, he moved into the 9—a high-rise building popular with local V.I.P.’s—which at street level was lined with bars where Clevelanders went to see and be seen. Pressed by reporters about his lifestyle at an N.F.L.-rookie symposium in Los Angeles, Manziel was defiant, saying he was determined to live the way he always had. But that life could be hard. Back at the symposium the next day, after a long night partying with Drake on the Sunset Strip, Manziel slipped beneath a tablecloth, with only his arm extended outside. Another rookie tried to stage a mock interview. Was he having fun in Los Angeles? Manziel managed a thumbs-up. How was his study of the Browns playbook coming? Manziel gave a thumbs-down. After the “rolled bill” photo surfaced, coach Mike Pettine told the press he had phoned Manziel and had a “positive conversation.” Privately, the Browns’ concern rose when Manziel seemed unprepared during training camp that August. One morning he reported late for a meeting—a taboo in the N.F.L., especially for a rookie—insisting he had “misread the schedule.”

Despite the hype, Manziel had not been expected to be the Browns’ starting quarterback. The incumbent was Brian Hoyer, a hometown hero who had starred at Cleveland’s St. Ignatius High School. Hoyer, who was fighting for a big contract, was in no mood to mentor Manziel, whose frustration was evident during the pre-season. “Going to Cleveland was just the worst thing ever,” says Brant. “He never felt he had any chance to succeed there. I mean, from day one. They didn’t get him any help, no receivers, nothing.” And Manziel wasn’t joking about his difficulty learning the Browns playbook; at A&M he hadn’t used one, instead perusing a brief game plan for each contest. “The only time I worried about Johnny was when I looked at that playbook, all those plays,” says Brant. “It was so complicated.” Still, most in Cleveland thought Manziel would assume the starter’s role at some point. “This being the Browns, I think everyone thought Hoyer would come out and lose the first three games, and they’d have to put in Johnny,” says Daryl Ruiter, of Cleveland’s 92.3 The Fan radio station. Amazingly, Hoyer led the Browns to wins in 7 of their first 11 games. “I know for a fact there were Browns people in the office who were upset that Hoyer was winning,” says Ruiter, “because they wanted Manziel in there so badly.” Then the starting center got injured, thwarting the running game; Hoyer, forced to pass into defenses that knew what was coming, began to get intercepted. The team lost two games in a row. For the team’s 14th game, against the arch-rival Cincinnati Bengals, Manziel was finally named the starter. It was a massacre. Manziel spent the entire game running for his life, behind an offensive line that showed little interest in protecting him. The Bengals won 30–0. Manziel was sacked three times and tossed two interceptions. “That was literally the worst game a Browns quarterback has ever played,” says Ruiter. Pettine fumed, “He looked like a rookie, played like a rookie.” “It was pretty apparent that the lack of preparation, the lack of commitment, derailed him,” says a friend. “In private, [Manziel] said, ‘The team quit on me.’ ” With Hoyer and Manziel both playing intermittently, the Browns lost their last two games and missed the playoffs. Manziel pulled a hamstring and was inactive for the final game, at Baltimore. He was supposed to receive treatment the day before the game; when he didn’t show or answer his phone, Browns security people found him asleep in his apartment. Multiple outlets reported this followed a party the night before. Manziel sheepishly denied it, and his partying, in fact, seemed under control that year, other than a single pushing-and-shoving incident with an unruly fan. “We knew something was wrong,” says Harley Hooper. “Johnny kind of quit communicating with us.” From TMZ/AKM-GSI.

In January, with the season behind him, Manziel joined Steven Brant and other friends in a series of trips, to Aspen, then to a friend’s ranch, then to a final night in Austin. “We partied that night, and the next morning I went back to College Station,” Brant says. “I was sleeping on Colton’s couch the next day, and he woke me up: ‘Dude, look at ESPN.’ ” It was Johnny: he had checked into a rehabilitation clinic in Pennsylvania. “I had no idea,” Brant says. “He never said anything. Later he told me he just woke up that day, felt like shit, and decided to go.” In a statement, Manziel said it was his decision, not the Browns’, and that’s what his friends believe. “As far as I know, he called his dad, and his dad went up and drove him there,” says Harley Hooper. Manziel spent 73 days in rehab. When he came out, he swore he was a new man, re-committed to football. And from all appearances, he was. After talking with the Browns, Manziel made changes in his private life. He moved out of the 9 to a roomy house on a golf course in the upscale suburb of Avon. And in a bid to create the kind of support system he’d had in college, one of his high-school coaches, Julius Scott, moved in, too. But within weeks the Browns’ beat writers begin to hear rumors that Manziel was partying again. One remembers sitting at home one evening watching a championship wrestling event in Cleveland when he spotted a familiar face. “I was like, ‘Wait a second, is that Johnny Manziel?’ ” this writer says. “So I freeze it. And that’s when I saw the people he was with. One is a guy everyone knows around town. He takes care of V.I.P.’s and athletes, you know? He owns bars. When I saw him next to Johnny, that told me right there that Johnny was not [sober].” “I started hearing the same shit: Johnny at this place, that place, hard partying, Johnny pulled out of someplace drunk,” says Tony Grossi, the dean of Browns beat writers. “We’d ask him, and he always denied it.” In fact, Manziel was drinking again, and maybe more. “After rehab, he needed a lot of help. He needed a sponsor, and to sponsor someone else,” says a member of his circle. “It’s really hard to do when you’re super-famous. . . . How do you believe you are a normal powerless person when everyone is constantly pumping you up, when you’re Johnny Fucking Football? Humility is crucial to recovery. And he never found it.” By training camp that August, Julius Scott had returned to Texas. Exactly why has never been explained, but friends suggest Manziel had simply tired of having a babysitter. Scott’s place was soon taken by a pretty Texas college student named Colleen Crowley, whom Johnny had been dating for months. Red Zone

For Manziel’s second season, the Browns replaced Brian Hoyer with a supportive journeyman named Josh McCown, who could start a few games and mentor Manziel until he was ready. But the plan went awry in the very first game when McCown suffered a concussion. Manziel was named the starter for the second game, against Tennessee. With expectations low, Manziel proved a revelation, running the offense smoothly, throwing two long touchdown passes and guiding Cleveland to the win. He was certain he had done enough to earn the starting job for good. Thus Manziel, and much of the N.F.L., was stunned when McCown recovered and was named to start Game Three. Johnny was distraught. His friends blamed the team. “The Cleveland Browns suck,” says Jim Muncie, a longtime friend from Kerrville. “They suck as an organization. They suck from ownership on down. They had terrible coaches and did a terrible job with Johnny. Pettine, he’s a nice guy, but he’s not a head coach. The chemistry was never good.” What worried Manziel’s family and friends was how Johnny would fill the void of not starting. “That boy, he can’t ride the bench with nothing to do,” Muncie observes. “That’s when he tends to get into trouble, you know.” On Monday, October 12, Manziel and Crowley fell into a serious fight in his car, on the side of a road near his home; she called 911 in hysterics, and told police Manziel had hit her and “pushed her head against the glass.” Both told an officer they had been drinking, Colleen to excess. From infphoto.com. Manziel stayed on the bench until McCown suffered a shoulder injury in a game on November 1. Manziel would start the rest of the season; with only two years guaranteed under his contract, everyone realized it was his last chance to show the Browns, and the N.F.L., what he could do. There was a bye week before the next game; he spent some of it partying with Brant in Texas. At a club in Austin, a D.J. videotaped him dancing and shouting while hoisting a bottle of champagne. “He was just having a good time,” says Brant. “He went into the D.J.’s booth at one place, and the D.J. shot some video and posted it. We were on the phone the next day when the video came out. Johnny was already back in Cleveland. I refreshed my Twitter and there it was. I said, ‘Did you watch this video?’ “ ‘What video?’ “I told him. He said, ‘I’ll call you back.’ When he does, he goes, ‘Well, I’m fucked.’ ” Brant sighs. “It wasn’t this crazy weekend,” he insists. “It was just a normal weekend.”