Marriage can be a beautiful, romantic thing. But all the paperwork that comes with it? That's less fun. It's tough to keep track of all the legal stuff you have to do when you get married. To make things a little easier, here's a checklist of what to take care of before and after you tie the knot.

Learn How Your Finances Will Change

Once you're married, some financial stuff will change, especially taxes.

Decide How You'll File Taxes

Decide whether to file them jointly or separately. If you file jointly, you'll combine both your incomes on your taxes. Obviously, filing separately means you'll keep them separate.

Advertisement

You decision will depend on whether you qualify for a "marriage bonus" or a "marriage penalty." A marriage bonus happens when combining your incomes means you pay less in taxes. A marriage penalty happens when combining incomes actually pushes you into a higher tax bracket, leading you to pay more. Most couples fall under the "marriage bonus" category. But here's a calculator to see how your situation stacks up.

Same-sex marriages

For same-sex couples, the tax laws might vary depending on your state. Federally, your taxes will be affected the same way opposite-sex spouses are. But if your state doesn't recognize your marriage, you may have to file taxes differently on a state level. We've written about that in more detail here.

Decide Whether or Not You Want a Prenuptial Agreement

When you marry, there are some financial responsibilities you'll share, and others that will be separate. A lot of it depends on where you live, but there are some general rules.

Advertisement

In most places, you're not responsible for any debt your spouse's incurred before you were married. Your past credit histories remain separate, and you don't share a credit score once you get married. But when you take on debt together, as a married couple, you will both be responsible for that debt. In some cases, you might also be responsible for any individual debt your spouse takes on during the marriage. We break down how specific financial moves work in our full post on how to protect your credit when you get married.

Of course, your spouse could also be entitled to your assets if you get divorced. Because of this, some couples opt for a prenuptial agreement. You'll want to get help from a lawyer, but here's the gist of how it works: you create a document listing your assets and existing debts, have your lawyer(s) draft the agreement, then get a notary to sign the agreement for you to keep on file.

Decide How to Merge Finances

Once you have an idea of how finances work when you're married, you can decide how you'll merge them, if that's something you decide to do. This decision is a personal one. You'll have to consider your taxes, state laws, personal preferences and come up with a method that works for you. We have some guidelines for getting started.

Find a Wedding Officiant

In order to file a marriage license, you'll need to get it signed and mailed by an officiant who married you. That means you'll have to find and pick one. Many couples ask a friend to become ordained so they can officiate the ceremony for them. The Knot offers some suggestions and details on how to go about this. Generally, they'll find a ministry, fill out an application, maybe pay a small fee, and they'll be certified.

File Your Marriage License

About a month before the actual ceremony, apply for a marriage license from your county clerk's office and pay the fee. Your county clerk or registrar's website should tell you exactly where to go and what to bring. You may need to call for an appointment.

According to FindLaw.com, it usually only takes a few days to get your license. In most states, it will expire. So, obviously, make sure you have the ceremony while your license is valid. See how long the limit is in your state, and how soon after getting the license you're allowed to get married.

Once you've officially tied the knot, you'll want to get your certificate. To do this, your officiant will send the signed license to the appropriate county office. Again, this info can probably be found on your county registrar's website. To get a copy of your certificate, fill out a form and pay a small fee.

Advertisement

A few states actually require a blood test to get a marriage license. According to Nolo, those places are: Mississippi, Montana, New York and D.C. The rules are different in each of those areas, so check out their chart for details.

Same-sex marriages

For same-sex marriages, the laws still vary. You may be able to obtain a marriage license in many states, but, depending on where you live, your state may not recognize it. If they don't, this will affect your state income tax and your ability to combine insurance policies and other benefits. U.S. Marriage Laws is a good resource for breaking it all down by state. Click on your state, then scroll down to find their rules for same-sex marriages.

Change Your Name

If you decide to change your name, you'll actually need to do this separately—and you'll have to notify a handful of different agencies. Changing it with Social Security is your top priority.

Get a New Social Security Card

You can't apply for a new social security card online. According to the Social Security Administration website, here's what you need to do:

Get a certified copy of your marriage certificate and birth certificate or other proof of citizenship.

Fill out and print your application for a social security card.

Take or mail the application to your local Social Security office.

The SSA has more detail here.

Get a New Driver's License

Once you have your new Social Security card, it's time to update your driver's license. Take your Social Security card, along with your birth certificate, marriage license and current driver's license, to the DMV in your area.

Advertisement

You can probably find the documents on your state's DMV website and fill them out before your appointment. Just don't sign them until you're in front of a DMV employee. From there, you'll pay a fee and get a new license with your new, married name on it.

Other Documents to Update

Aside from your driver's license and Social Security card, here are a few other documents or agencies to update with the new info.

Passport : The government offers some basic instructions here.

: The government offers some basic instructions here. Bank, credit union and investment accounts : They might require you to come in to a branch, as they'll want to see your new driver's license. Some banks have name change forms you can just send in.

: They might require you to come in to a branch, as they'll want to see your new driver's license. Some banks have name change forms you can just send in. Post office : According to eHow, you can do this online via USPS's Change of Address form.

: According to eHow, you can do this online via USPS's Change of Address form. Utilities: Update your info online or give them a call.

If you have any work benefits, like an insurance plan or 401(k), you'll need to notify your employer or carrier, too. They'll want to see a copy of your social security card, according to The Nest. And speaking of work benefits, lets discuss how those will work now that you're married.

Combine Insurance Policies

Of course, you don't have to add your spouse to your policy (or vice versa). But Investopedia explains that it's usually cheaper to add a spouse to a group health plan than it is for both of you to have separate plans. Compare prices and choose the one that's best for you. Once you make a decision, update the plan with your employer.

Advertisement

You might also get a better rate if you combine car and life insurance policies as a married couple. Call and see what your options are. The insurance companies will probably want a copy of your marriage certificate.

Add a Beneficiary & Create a Will

It's a little depressing to think about, sure. But it's important to prepare for the inevitable. It's just the responsible thing to do. While you're updating your bank accounts, retirement accounts and insurance policies, ask about adding your spouse as a beneficiary. This means, in case something happens to you, your spouse will inherit your assets.

Advertisement

You'll also want to create a living will, power of attorney, medical power of attorney and a last will and testament. We've created a thorough guide on how to prepare these documents.

Of course, you don't have to designate your spouse as the beneficiary in your will or with your accounts. You can always choose someone else. Either way, you should get all this stuff in order.

Decide How to Save For Retirement

When you get married, your retirement accounts remain individual, according to the Motley Fool. If your company offers an employer-sponsored 401(k), for example, it can only be in your name, and only you, as an employer, can contribute to it. The Nest explains:

When a company offers a 401k retirement plan, it only offers this benefit to its employees. You can add money from your salary into your account, but other people cannot. Even though you are married, you cannot invest more per year. The contribution limit is the same for both married and single workers. Your wife can put money away in her own retirement account, but she won't be able to split the benefit of your 401k account while you're together.

Of course, this doesn't mean you can't save for retirement together, even if the account is in one person's name. You'll just have to figure out how to budget for that, accordingly.

Advertisement

If you both have an employer sponsored plan, you might consider combining your savings and optimizing whichever account has the better benefits. Try to take full advantage of each company's match, but, if you can't afford that, try to fully invest in the better match first.

Individual Retirement Accounts, or IRAs, can't be held jointly, either. But each spouse can have his or her own IRA and contribute to each others' IRAs. According to the IRS:

If you file a joint return and have taxable compensation, you and your spouse can both contribute to your own separate IRAs. Your total contributions to both your IRA and your spouse's IRA may not exceed your joint taxable income or the annual contribution limit on IRAs times two, whichever is less. It doesn't matter which spouse earned the income.

Basically, you can combine your contribution limits, and they don't care whose paycheck it comes from. So if your spouse doesn't work, and you do, you can contribute to his or her account even if you've reached your own IRA contribution limit.

Advertisement

Another thing to consider is your asset allocation. Depending on how you decide to save for your retirement, you should diversify your assets accordingly. The American Association of Individual Investors recommends:

The first step is to develop an asset allocation strategy for your combined savings, taking into consideration all the risks you will face, including long-term risks such as purchasing power loss, and the significant risks of being too heavily concentrated in one sector, industry or stock. Once you have worked out an asset allocation strategy as a couple, you should allocate the investment of your retirement assets by taking full advantage of the choices within the best plan.

One spouse's plan might have better stock options than the other. In that case, you might consider using that plan to invest in stocks and the other to invest in bonds. Basically, you want to decide how you'll allocate your assets, together, and then pick your best options for each kind of asset.

Advertisement

It seems like there's a big, legal to-do list that comes with marriage. Most of us just figure it out as we go. But knowing in advance what to expect can help streamline the whole process a little easier.