Donald Trump traveled to Texas on Tuesday to assess the damage and rescue efforts from Hurricane Harvey. But he didn't actually visit the most storm-ravaged areas in Houston or talk to any storm survivors.

But that didn't stop the president from talking like he had.

SEE ALSO: Very good businessman President Trump uses Texas tragedy to show off his crappy merch

In a tweet Wednesday morning, he said he had witnessed the "horror & devastation" caused by the storm "first hand."

After witnessing first hand the horror & devastation caused by Hurricane Harvey,my heart goes out even more so to the great people of Texas! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) August 30, 2017

Reporters who had covered the presidential trip to Texas were quick to note the president mostly met with officials and visited places like Corpus Christi and Austin. Those cities weren't as affected like Rockport or Houston, which took the brunt of the storm.

I traveled with the President yesterday. Personally, I would not claim to have seen Harvey's horror and devastation first hand. https://t.co/Zb7bsF5CW5 — Andrew Beatty (@AndrewBeatty) August 30, 2017

.@AP on the "horror & devastation" Trump actually saw "first hand" — through the tinted windows of an SUV https://t.co/rXlBPlhvvm pic.twitter.com/d1ROE3Dscy — Nolan D. McCaskill (@NolanDMcCaskill) August 30, 2017

He saw it on TV. That's reality. https://t.co/ypETuSrW0d — David Corn (@DavidCornDC) August 30, 2017

Trump went to a briefing at a Corpus Christi fire station, toured the emergency operations center in Austin, and met with the Texas governor and other emergency officials. No relief shelter visits or viewings of destroyed homes or city streets. Just read the first sentence of this Politico story: "It was a presidential trip to a deluged state where the president didn’t meet a single storm victim, see an inch of rain or get near a flooded street."

But Trump did make it to the state of Texas, so for the president that's close enough.

Trump: After witnessing first hand the horror & devastation caused by Hurricane Harvey —



Media: BITCH YOU WEREN’T EVEN IN HOUSTON — Eric Haywood (@EricHaywood) August 30, 2017