Ferrari

Charles Coates | Getty Images

Mark Thompson | Getty Images

Renaultsport

Mark Thompson | Getty Images

Haas F1

Dan Istitene | Getty Images

Good news, everyone: the 2017 Formula 1 season starts this weekend. As has become tradition, the first race of the year is in Melbourne, Australia, meaning those of us in Europe or North America can expect a late night or very early morning. This will be the first year under new management—with Liberty having purchased F1 from CVC, ousting Bernie in the process—and also the first year for new aerodynamics regulations and new tires. The two preseason tests have come and gone, but yet again—and despite more than 20 years following the sport—I still have no idea who's going to come out on top.

Black and round

The principal complaint about F1 in recent years—along with inaudible engines, exorbitant ticket prices, and the boredom of overwhelming Mercedes domination—has been the Pirelli tires. Specifically, it's about the tires' inability to cope with more than one heat cycle. With most racing slicks, if you push too hard and overheat the tire, backing off for a few corners lets them cool down, and everything goes back to normal. But when the F1 Pirellis of the past few years overheat, they're ruined. (It's possible this is caused by a particular chemical used in the manufacturing process that makes the tire compound extrudable.) That won't be the case this year; now the tires will suffer little to no drop-off or degradation, so expect a lot of one-stop strategies, at least for the first few races.

If the new tires are going to make life easy for the strategists, they'll have the opposite effect on the drivers. The chief consequence of those old tires was that in a race, everyone was cruising around two to three seconds slower than the ultimate pace of the car. Pushing it and ruining a set of tires simply wasn't worth the risk. That's no longer a concern; add in the extra downforce and larger contact patches from the new tire sizes and you get a recipe for F1 drivers having to work a lot harder in the car than any time since 2011. As it should be.

Lap times in testing mean nothing

Times from the preseason tests in Spain confirm that test lap times don't mean much. Fastest of all was Finnish driver Kimi Räikkönen in one of the Ferraris, lapping Catalunya in 1:18.634. To put that in some context, at last year's Spanish Grand Prix, the fastest time of the weekend was Lewis Hamilton's pole-winning lap in Q3 at 1:22:000. (The absolute fastest lap we can find is from 2008, when Fernando Alonso turned a 1:14.648 in qualifying.) What's more, Kimi set that time on the super-soft (rather than the ultra-soft) tires. His teammate Sebastian Vettel claimed the second-fastest overall time, suggesting that the red team from Maranello may finally be back on form.

But this is F1, and things are never that simple. No one wants to show their true hand in preseason testing, and we have no idea of fuel loads—and therefore car weights—for any of the fastest times. Did Ferrari run the car significantly lighter than Mercedes to keep the bloodthirsty Italian press happy? I still have no real idea and won't until after qualifying rounds in Australia this weekend.

Mercedes drivers Valteri Bottas and Lewis Hamilton weren't far behind the Ferraris in testing. Were the Silver Arrows sandbagging? If so, it's going to be a very boring season again, particularly if Bottas needs some time to take the fight to Hamilton. What we do know is that the team covered 3,170 miles (5102km) during those eight days, equivalent to at least an entire F1 season.

Both teams look to have the advantage over Red Bull, which still needs more power from its Tag Heuer engines. The most interesting thing to watch this coming year will be the relationship between Max Verstappen and Daniel Ricciardo. The Dutch wunderkind is still only 19, and amid flashes of brilliance, we've also seen hints of petulance and impatience. Expect fireworks between the two if the car becomes a title contender.

Listing image by Ferrari