Having been an only child, I didn't know how quickly sibling rivalry began. But when my kids were toddlers, they seemed to argue and fight over every little thing. The absolute best parenting hack that I have relied on is color coding the kids. I still rely on it in some areas. Here's how to do it and everywhere it applies.

Color coding is very simple. Assign each child a color. You can pick them or let them choose. Stick with the basic colors—red, blue, green, yellow, orange. Color coding will keep you from adopting that imaginary kid "not me!" (Who didn't follow the rules? "Not me!")

Advertisement

Making it work is easy. Whatever area you find chaos, use the color code system.

In the kitchen, I bought each kid a set of dishes (cups, plates, bowls, mugs) in their color. This kept me from washing a million cups a day. Also at a glance you will be able to tell who didn't put their dishes in the sink/dishwasher, or follow whatever kitchen rule you have.

Also, I did this with bath towels. Each child got a set of towels in their own color. Again, at a glance you can tell who left their towel on the floor, etc.

Buy color coded laundry baskets. Now you can quickly sort laundry for each child as you take it out the dryer.

Buy school supplies in the color code system (backpacks, pencils, pencil pouches, etc).

If your kids have identical devices (MP3 players, tablets, cell phones), as my now teenagers do, there is a way to color code here too. They will no doubt customize their gadgets but to keep down confusion about chargers, swap out the data cables for colored ones. You can do this for the wall charger too but I just simply recommend a marking those with finger nail polish or permanent marker in their color. With color coding, you don't have to hear "hey, that's mine".

Believe it or not, they will form the habit of picking up after themselves because they will not be able to blame it on anyone else. If your kids do chores, like mine, color code their tasks. All they have to do is check the chart, see their color, and they know what they're doing for the day.

Advertisement

Color coding also works for scheduling too. If you need to keep school and extracurricular activities straight for each kid, color code.

You can use color coding for many things or just a few. Whatever works best for you. Basically, whenever you hear "not me!" or "that's mine!", or you're asking yourself "who's supposed to be doing what?", you can color code.