Quinoa pizza crust has been on my list of recipes to blog about for literally years now.

I’ve made variations a time or two in the past, only to be disappointed by the bitterness of the quinoa, texture, or major pan ‘stickage’.

All is different now.

With just a few tweaks, nips, and tucks, this recipe has gone from being a good, gluten-free base, to being a fabulous substitute for anyone with allergies or the inclination to be a bit healthier.

Though I adore my Zucchini Pizza Crust and, in particular, Personal Pan Cauliflower Crust, there’s always room for pizza variations. Since eating the same food over and over leaves me more vulnerable to develop an allergy to it, it is nice to have multiple alternatives for my favorite meals.

Obviously, this recipe is made with quinoa, so if you’re not a fan of the seed, you may want to consider another healthy variation. If you’re like me, however, and love quinoa, then I truly believe you’ll adore it like this!

This pizza is soft, yet sturdy, with crunchy edges and a filling bite. It is a terrific and EASY stand-in for any wheat-laden variety, and it packs a substantial protein punch!

4 from 2 votes Print 5-Ingredient Quinoa Pizza Crust (Vegan, Gluten-Free) Prep Time 8 hr Cook Time 30 mins Total Time 8 hr 30 mins Only five ingredients to create a terrific gluten-free pizza crust without any gums, starches, or multiple flours.

Course: Entree Cuisine: Pizza Servings : 6 slices Calories : 94 kcal Author : Lauren Goslin Ingredients 3/4 c. quinoa rinsed and drained

1/4 c. water

1/2 t. sea salt

1 t. baking powder

1 T. oil I've used both coconut and olive with great results. Be sure the coconut oil is melted if you choose to use it. Instructions Rinse the quinoa VERY WELL. Place the rinsed quinoa in a bowl and cover it with water (about one inch above where the quinoa sits). Let the quinoa soak overnight (at least eight hours). Preheat the oven to 425 degrees. Drain and RINSE the quinoa VERY WELL again. Place the drained and rinsed quinoa into a food processor along with the water, salt, and baking powder. Process the mix for about two minutes until it is smooth in consistency. Line an 8- or 9-inch cake pan with parchment paper. (I just place the cake pan on top of the parchment paper, draw an outline of it, cut it out, and place it into the cake pan.) Pour the oil into the pan atop the parchment paper. Pour the batter into the cake pan atop the oil, smoothing it out evenly. Bake the crust for 15 minutes. Carefully flip the crust over, and bake it for another five minutes. Top the pizza as desired. Bake the pizza for another 5-10 minutes until your toppings have cooked through. Cool, cut, and serve! Recipe Notes Nutrition facts are based on using coconut oil. Weight Watchers points (new system): 2 Nutrition Facts 5-Ingredient Quinoa Pizza Crust (Vegan, Gluten-Free) Amount Per Serving (1 g) Calories 94 Calories from Fat 32 % Daily Value* Total Fat 3.5g 5% Saturated Fat 2.1g 11% Polyunsaturated Fat 1.4g Sodium 158mg 7% Total Carbohydrates 13.2g 4% Dietary Fiber 1.4g 6% Protein 2.8g 6% * Percent Daily Values are based on a 2000 calorie diet.

Adapted from this recipe

**FOR AN UPDATED VIDEO DEMONSTRATION OF THIS RECIPE, CLICK HERE.

I’ve enjoyed topping this many ways including using this Healthy, Homemade Pizza Sauce and this Low-Fat Broccoli Pesto.

I’m not allergic to cheese, thankfully, so I use a part-skim mozzarella and parmesan combination, but if you have allergies or are vegan, you could top this with any number of vegetables or alternative cheeses. A sprinkling of nutritional yeast is also delicious!

Whatever variation you make, I am certain that you will LOVE this!

What is your favorite way to top a pizza?

I’m a fan of using caramelized onions, sautéed arugula, and crumbled goat cheese together. SO good!

Shared with: Allergy-Free Wednesday, Meatless Monday