5 Makeup Tips For Older Women By 64 year old makeup artist turned super model Cindy Joseph

If you’re going to use a foundation to even out skin tone, find one that gives coverage but doesn’t add texture. Be willing to spend money on a foundation and take your time to experiment and find the exact right shade. Matching your skin tone exactly is critical.

Especially no contour in the crease because it gives the appearance of deepening the crease. A little bit of mascara is OK.

Women older than 50 tend to lose definition in their eyebrows. Just go with that.

“There is this pressure in Hollywood to be ageless,” said Aniston. “I also understand that age is kind of awesome ... Don’t over-product — that’s the other thing.”

Jennifer Aniston believes in aging gracefully and not over-doing it on the makeup. When asked by Self Magazine what is in her purse when she leaves for the day, she said, “ Boomstick Color: It’s an all-in-one stain for eyes, cheeks and lips that’s so much fun.”

The line is not just for Boomers like Joseph. “BOOM! is the sound of a revolution in cosmetics,” she says. “Cosmetic companies are constantly adding products; I’m taking away. Mine is the only company that is pro-aging, not antiaging.

“The whole idea of less is more, that women shouldn’t be slaves to dozens of makeup products , is what I really believe in,” said Cindy Joseph, a makeup artist and model who’s pared down her own cosmetics kit to just a few items. Three of them are from her new line of multiple-use cream sticks called BOOM!.

The BOOM! Products come in identical chubby silver tubes that fit in the palm of your hand. Boomstick Color, a sheer berry for cheeks, brow bone, eyes, lips, forehead and neck ; Boomstick Glimmer, a sheer iridescent champagne for the inner corner of the eye, cheekbones, shoulders, decollete; Boomstick Glow an olive oil and beeswax moisturizer for lips, cuticles and around the eyes.

Judging by the photos and videos, Joseph, who recently turned 60, needs no makeup at all. She’s one of those Emmylou Harris beauties with lovely features, luminous skin and long silver hair, who spends just a few minutes a day on her face before she’s out the door. As women age, she says, looking fresh, rather than made up, is the key.

“The biggest makeup mistake that middle-aged women make is putting on too much under eye concealer,” she said. “At home, it might look OK, but in the daylight, it just looks like a bunch of gunk under your eyes. The older you get, the less makeup you should wear. It’s not a blank canvas anymore.”

After growing up in the Bay Area – Mission San Jose High School, Fremont, class of ’69 – she moved to Paris in the early ’80s and later to New York.

“I was a classic California flower child,” she says. “I went to Haight Ashbury on the weekends, the Fillmore West, the Avalon Ballroom. I was at the center of it all. People still ask me to this day: ‘Are you from San Francisco?’”

Joseph married young, had two kids and began her makeup artist career in San Francisco in the late ’70s, working for Macy’s, Esprit de Corp and others.

“I always had the smallest kit and the fewest products of any of my colleagues,” she remembers. She let her hair go gray in her late 40s, and just like that, she was spotted on a New York sidewalk by a scout for the fashion photographer Steven Miesel and has been a model ever since, featured in ads for Target, L.L. Bean, Dolce & Gabbana, DKNY, Olay, Nivea and others.

About a year ago, she went into the cosmetics business herself. “I’d done makeup for two decades and when I created this line, I created what I would want in my own kit,” she says. “I wanted to do a line that was not about hiding, but was about revealing.” The overall effect, she says, is a dewy, glowing face.

“When somebody says to you, ‘Wow, did you fall in love?’

That’s successful makeup.”