There is an article doing the rounds online at the moment called "Don't Date a Girl Who Travels." The writer discusses the perils of well... dating a girl who travels.

Without going too much into it, I understand her article is satirical, but many people do look at those qualities of female travelers and believe them to be negative. I am simply showing how the wonder of travel can influence our day to day life rather than always lead us to wanting more. (This is also inspired by Rosemarie Urquico's "Date a Girl who Reads.")

This is my reply...

Date a girl who travels. She is the one with the sun kissed skin and lightly scattered freckles. A sense of wellness radiates around her, paired with plump healthy skin and a twinkle in her eye.

Date a girl who travels. She is less materialistic. She doesn't dote on possessions but rather treasured experiences. Expensive presents are unnecessary, rather give her photographs she can have with her at all times. She can see those that live with less, recognize the small fortunes of happiness.

Date a girl who travels for somewhere is always home. She values her time there and relishes hearing about normalcy even if it's not long before her feet start to itch again. She is proud of her hometown for it is a new city for someone else to explore.

Date a girl who travels. She is the hardest working woman you will know. She will most likely hold down two or three jobs to fund her adventures. Not to mention an entrepreneur turning her travels into an income source. She is smart and knows that these days many employees find international travel favorable in future candidates.

Date a girl who travels for you will always be pleasantly surprised. She navigates unknown cities with a great sense of direction but also enjoys the spontaneity of getting lost.

Date a girl who travels. After many missed flights, wrong turns, delays, bad street food and bad restrooms to deposit said food, she is easy going and adaptable. She is prepared for bumps in the road literally and metaphorically. Life throws curve balls and she smacks them right out of the park

Date a girl who travels because she is supportive and understanding. She is conscious you may not ever be as travel orientated as her but she will always be fun, take what life has to offer and help you do the same. As a bonus she will put up with snoring and farting because she has shared a 20 bunk hostel room.

Date a girl who travels as she engages with worldly company learning the history, culture and behaviors of societies, which is sure to impress the parents. She is used to befriending strangers, thriving at conversation. She will always be open to meeting new people and impress at your work social engagements.

Date a girl who travels. She is independent, smart and strong. She will always be self-sufficient; never needy. She doesn't believe in stage five clingers. She knows the rewards of good budgets and saving her money. She learns the ins and outs of how people live and has the kind of street smarts that will spot the sketchy looking guy a mile away before he pulls a "distract and go" scam.

Next time join her. Travel bonds you.

Visit Stephanie's blog stephabroad.com, where this post first appeared.