Take Magnesium and Vitamin D

Together to Avoid Side Effects

I'll bet that no one has told you that Magnesium and Vitamin D should be taken together in order to avoid vitamin D side effects and to maximize absorption of both nutrients. Nutrients don't work alone, and when it comes to taking vitamin D, it's important that you take magnesium and vitamin D together and not JUST vitamin d alone in large doses as this can lead to what people BELIEVE are vitamin d side effects, but are really just magnesium deficiency symptoms that have been induced because of how vitamin D 'uses up' magnesium in its conversion to its 'active form' in the bloodstream from supplements and sunlight.

This is a BIG problem because as more and more people, and their doctors, begin to realize the amazing health benefits that Vitamin D has to offer and to understand the seriousness of the long termSymptoms of Vitamin D Deficiency, more people are taking vitamin d with the effect of there being an increase in people having these so called 'vitamin d side effects'.



But what is Not being addressed by health care practitioners, however, is that many of these 'Vitamin D Side Effects' are not problems with the vitamin d, but are problems with not getting enough magnesium! There would be a significant reduction in problems with taking vitamin d if only people would take magnesium and vitamin d together were taken at the same time.

Part of this problem is that nearly as many people have undiagnosed magnesium deficiencies as do people with vitamin d deficiencies. And unfortunately, blood Magnesium Levels are virtually worthless and can't tell you if you really are magnesium deficient!

In fact, Signs of Magnesium Deficiency are SO prevalent that Dr. Carolyn Dean calls this problem an 'Epidemic'. And if you have even aMILD unrecognized magnesium deficiency, your Signs of Magnesium Deficiency are going to be amplified greatly when vitamin d is taken- particularly in the large doses commonly used for vitamin d deficiency treatment. And this is creating some uncomfortable Side Effects of Vitamin D that are actually NOT problems with taking vitamin d itself, but symptoms of an induced magnesium deficiency!

Some of the problems experienced by those taking vitamin D alone are:



Insomnia

Jitteriness

Anxiety

Constipation

Headaches



Worsening Pain

Body Pain/Bone Pain

All of which are exactly the same as Signs of Magnesium Deficiency!! While certainly there are always going to be those who simply can't tolerate taking Vitamin D Supplements for one reason or another, the good news is that the vast majority of these problems can be cleared up or easily prevented by being sure to take sufficient cofactors, with Vitamin A and Vitamin K being equally as important as taking magnesium in a dosage sufficient to resolve any latent deficiency, such as that is outlined on the Magnesium Dosage page, along with your vitamin d.

How Magnesium and Vitamin D

Work Together

Since magnesium is required for the conversion of vitamin d into its active form, it's also true that taking vitamin d may not raise Vitamin D Blood Levels in those who are magnesium deficient!! Be sure that you read this again and understand this magnesium and vitamin d interrelationship:



Magnesium is 'Used Up' when Vitamin D is converted into its active form in the blood

Magnesium is 'Required' to convert Vitamin D into its active form in the blood

It works BOTH ways. Magnesium is not JUST depleted, but you won't convert vitamin d unless you have enough magnesium in order to allow vitamin d to BE converted!! In many cases where large doses of vitamin d are taken but the vitamin d level does not come up, both the person deficient and their doctor believe that they are having Vitamin D Absorption problems. This ends up causing:

A lot of fear that an underlying serious medical problem exists Unnecessarily high dosages of Vitamin D are often taken causing worsening of the magnesium deficiency Thousands and sometimes tens of thousands of dollars are spent in unnecessary medical testing to find the 'absorption' problem The underlying magnesium deficiency is often never found and addressed because testing for magnesium levels is not a useful test to determine need for that nutrient

Unlike drugs, nutrients are 'synergistic' and interconnected with each other. Especially in the case of Magnesium and Vitamin D it's EXTREMELY important that you take magnesium and vitamin D TOGETHER when you are taking vitamin D in order to prevent these problems.

Another reason for this is that magnesium helps calcium absorption as well, and many women who take Vitamin D and Calcium 'For My Bones' don't end up taking magnesium along with these two nutrients- and this can impair the bone building effectiveness of the vitamin d and calcium.

So, don't get caught taking vitamin d without taking both magnesium and vitamin d together! It's really THAT important! Keep reading to find out what OTHER factors can affect vitamin d absorption...

Next --->

Vitamin D Absorption









Search this Site

Ask Your Question. It will be posted publicly. READ THE TIPS BEFORE POSTING Tip #1: SEARCH THE SITE FIRST! USE THE SEARCH BOX IN THE TOP RIGHT OF EVERY PAGE. 99% of all questions have been answered already. I will just delete your question if it's been answered already.



Tip #2: INCLUDE YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS on the Confirmation Page. There is no other way for you to get the answer to your question!



Tip #3: Include details so that I can help you more effectively.. and don't forget to include an email address on the confirmation page



Tip #4: Include a DESCRIPTIVE TITLE that tells about your problem. Saying 'Help Me' or something similarly nondescriptive does not help me to know what the problem is. A title such as "My _______ Level is Not Coming Up" is much more helpful.



Tip #5: If you are on a mobile device, please recheck your spelling and grammar.



Tip #6: Use decent grammar and complete sentences. Most of you are adults who went through over a decade of some sort of compulsory education. Please at least make your questions understandable. If you are not a native English speaker, just do your best.



Tip #7: SEARCH THE SITE FIRST! USE THE SEARCH BOX IN THE TOP RIGHT OF EVERY PAGE. 99% of all questions have been answered already. Put a Title that Describes Your Problem Here. BUT ONLY IF YOU HAVE SEARCHED THE SITE FOR YOUR ANSWER FIRST Ask your Question ONLY IF YOU HAVE SEARCHED THE SITE FIRST ? ] Close Help Entering your question is easy to do. Just type!...



Remember: INCLUDE YOUR EMAIL ADDRESS on the CONFIRMATION PAGE (next). There is no other way to get the answer to your question!! ? ] Close Help Do you have a picture to add? Great! Click the button and find it on your computer. Then select it.

Your picture must be smaller than 800x600 pixels.



If it's larger, then you'll have to resize it before you are able to upload it.

Upload 1-4 Pictures or Graphics (optional) Add a Picture/Graphic Caption (optional) Click here to upload more images (optional) Add a Picture/Graphic Caption (optional) Add a Picture/Graphic Caption (optional) Add a Picture/Graphic Caption (optional) Author Information (optional) To receive credit as the author, enter your information below. Your Name (first or full name) Your Location (e.g., City, State, Country) Submit Your Contribution Check box to agree to these submission guidelines.

(You can preview and edit on the next page)

Back to the Top of Magnesium and Vitamin D



To Easy Immune Health Home Page

