Cancer is a water sign symbolized by the crab. Those born under Cancer will exhibit personality traits ranging from sweetness and loyalty to petulance and resentment. It takes a full-spectrum view of all Cancer's characteristics to truly understand and appreciate this complicated sign.

Changeable Cancer

Each astrological sign tends to have at least one key characteristic that really identifies it. Cancers, whether fairly or unfairly, are known for their moodiness. This is because Cancer's ruler, the Moon, waxes and wanes with the changing tides. Just as the moon has its phases, so does Cancer. This can be a help or, in some instances, a hindrance. For better or for worse, Cancer feels things very deeply.

Positive Cancer Personality Traits

To understand this highly complicated sign a little better, take a look at Cancer's positive traits. Just keep in mind that every Cancer's birth chart has a multitude of other astrological influences, and this will affect the degree to which an individual expresses these traits.

Tender-Hearted

The tender-hearted trait that's so prominent in Cancer is often misunderstood by other zodiac signs. To complicate matters, Cancers find it difficult to communicate what they're feeling because they shut down all emotional responses when hurt. Most of the time, they seem emotionally immature when compared to other signs. While this might be true in some cases, most of the time it's simply that they have a uniquely receptive nature.

Once you get to know these people, you'll quickly realize that they're actually highly-evolved individuals who aren't just sensitive to their own emotions. They're also sensitive to other people's feelings. This empathic ability complicates a Cancer's emotional state of being. Many Cancers are unable to distinguish the difference between their feelings and those they sense in others. Many empaths and psychics have sun signs or several planets in Cancer.

Family-Oriented

The family that Cancer creates with her mate will receive undying loyalty and dedication. She'll move mountains to see that her children have what they need and, in many cases, will lavish them with material gifts. Cancers are capable of great love, but first they must learn how to give it. Once they do, their family will blossom under their nurturing.

Cancers are very proud of their children and see them as an extension of themselves. They teach them good manners and social mores, and they expect them to be just as well-behaved in private as they are in public. Cancers consider their homes their retreat, and they need order and calm to reign there so they can recharge after a hectic day.

Homebody at Heart

It's no surprise Cancers are very attached to their homes. Like hermit crabs, they cannot survive without a home to call their own. It keeps them grounded and makes them feel safe. Cancers will spend a lot of money decorating their homes and filling them with all the things that give them comfort and make them feel secure.

Artistic and Creative

Cancers are happiest when they're sharing their love for something, like writing or poetry, with those around them. They tend to have a strong creative force, one that involves them with the arts in some capacity, and they take great pleasure in expressing themselves creatively.

Excellent Worker and Provider

Cancers are excellent providers and diligent workers. They work best when left on their own without anyone trying to micro-manage their workload. Most Cancers treat their jobs much the same way as they do their homes. They are protective of their job status and often hold managerial positions. They expect loyalty, and they treat their employees like family. Cancers will give a sympathetic ear to a co-worker as long as the problem doesn't threaten their own job security.

Negative Side of the Cancer Profile

Every sign has a few negative traits, and Cancer is no exception. How strongly these traits are expressed has a lot to do with the other aspects of an individual's chart.

Fearful of Rejection

Cancers need to express their feelings without fear of rebuke. Shy Cancers are deathly afraid of being rejected, so if they feel that there's even the slightest chance that will happen, they'll immediately pull back into their shells.

Resentful

One of the less fortunate personality traits of Cancer is they can become resentful and petulant rather quickly. If they feel they've been slighted in some way (whether real or imagined), they'll likely let the resentment they feel build up inside until it finally explodes. The trouble is that nearly anything can make them feel resentful. They have incredibly fertile imaginations, and when they are not using this creativity in a productive manner, they can sometimes use these talents destructively.

Simply put, it's very difficult to please Cancers at all times. The best you can do is to wait until they snap out of it and return to normal.

Unforgiving

If you ever fall from Cancer's good graces, you may never be forgiven. You may not even know what you said or did, but one thing is certain; when that door slams behind you, it will likely never be opened again. You could spend years replaying your last conversation in an effort to understand what went wrong. Don't bother. You can never unravel the complexity of Cancer's emotional makeup.

Deeper Characteristics

Taking a deeper look into Cancer's psyche reveals even more about this sign. There's a softness beneath the crab's shell that's worth exploring.

Intuitive : The crab is a sea creature and as such, takes it cues from the moon. Depending on the ebb and flow of the tides, the crab decides how to best chart its course. Cancers do the same thing as they respond instinctively to the situations around them.

: The crab is a sea creature and as such, takes it cues from the moon. Depending on the ebb and flow of the tides, the crab decides how to best chart its course. Cancers do the same thing as they respond instinctively to the situations around them. Soft underbelly : The similarities between this sign and its symbol continue because both have extremely soft underbellies. It's no secret Cancers are easily hurt, and their wounds take a very long time to heal.

: The similarities between this sign and its symbol continue because both have extremely soft underbellies. It's no secret Cancers are easily hurt, and their wounds take a very long time to heal. Kindness : There's a big difference between being nice and being kind, and Cancer is truly aware of this. Whether it's rescuing a stray dog or feeding the homeless, Cancer is the first one in line to offer a helping hand.

: There's a big difference between being nice and being kind, and Cancer is truly aware of this. Whether it's rescuing a stray dog or feeding the homeless, Cancer is the first one in line to offer a helping hand. Dependable : While their moods may flicker like that of a candle caught in a storm, you can always depend on them. Whether it's for love, money, or simply to lend a helping hand, Cancers are known for coming through in a pinch.

: While their moods may flicker like that of a candle caught in a storm, you can always depend on them. Whether it's for love, money, or simply to lend a helping hand, Cancers are known for coming through in a pinch. Rarely direct : Cancers do not like confrontations, and they will usually go out of their way to avoid arguments. Just like an actual crab will move sideways when it perceives danger, Cancers step aside when they can.

: Cancers do not like confrontations, and they will usually go out of their way to avoid arguments. Just like an actual crab will move sideways when it perceives danger, Cancers step aside when they can. Anger : It takes a lot for these folks to blow up, but once they do, watch out! Perhaps this is because these natives spend so much time stifling their anger.

: It takes a lot for these folks to blow up, but once they do, watch out! Perhaps this is because these natives spend so much time stifling their anger. Action taker : Cancer is a cardinal sign and therefore, one of action. At a moment's notice, Cancer is truly ready to spring into action to right a wrong.

: Cancer is a cardinal sign and therefore, one of action. At a moment's notice, Cancer is truly ready to spring into action to right a wrong. Persistent: Cancers, like their opposite sign of Capricorn, are known for their staying power, and they can outlast just about any adversary. After all, crabs have claws for a reason. So when Cancers decide to fight for something, you can rest assured that they will go the distance.

Getting Along with Cancer

All the various characteristics of Cancer can make these people quite a handful to deal with. Try to be careful with your words and be supportive of the Cancer person in your life. It may take more work to maintain the relationship, but Cancer's positive traits make it worth the effort.