Name: Danielle, Michael, Enzo, and Ziggy Gutelli

Location: Plymouth — Michigan

Size: 1,700 square feet

Years lived in: 2 years, owned

Danielle and Michael were both born and raised in the Midwest (Metro Detroit and St. Louis, respectively) and met in Chicago, where they resided together for 10 years. After their first born, Enzo, came into the world, they decided to make the move to Michigan to be closer to family. It's here that they settled in Downtown Plymouth, a Detroit suburb, which has a very family-centric and city vibe. They have two sons, Enzo and Ziggy, and a dog named Jade.

"When we first stepped foot in our home we saw a canvas that had been neglected — but we had a vision and knew what it could be. Our 'bungalow' was built in 1950, with a master bedroom addition created in 2010. Within our community, we're seeing a drastic shift in demolition and re-construction of properties — often multiple lots merged into one — yet they all lack the personality of the times in which our community was created. We're the opposite."

Danielle is the creator and face of Mom Wife Foodie, a lifestyle blog rooted in all things family. While Danielle is the creator, Michael runs the website and photography. Together they co-host The Mom Wife Foodie Podcast and are co-founders of Clark + Aldine, a creative consulting agency.

"Our home reflects our family's style (Eclectic Chic) with many modern and 'smart' updates sprinkled throughout the home. We're a very active family and our space is adaptable to anything we throw at it every day."

Apartment Therapy Survey:

Our Style: Eclectic Chic

Inspiration: When we purchased and renovated our home we set out to create a space that truly embodied who we are and the experiences we've had throughout our lives. If we had to name one inspiration, well, Chip and Joanna Gaines we thank you!

Favorite Element: Our dining room. We eat every meal together as a family at that table. All of our closest friends got together and pulled a pool of cash together to buy us our table as a wedding gift...and we think of them every time we sit down. We added the custom board and batten trim, chandelier and hand-painted artwork from our honeymoon in Barcelona to create a space that is truly "us".

Biggest Challenge: We participated in the "One Room Challenge by Calling It Home" this past spring. The challenge we set out on was to create a master bedroom retreat...but we refused to stop there. To us, focusing solely on our bedroom seemed selfish — so we decided to increase the bar and renovate our entire second floor — which includes our boys' bedroom and hallway. Renovating one room from floor-to-ceiling in six weeks is an incredible feat...three rooms brings it to a whole new level.

What Friends Say: To be honest, all of our closest friends have been there for the entire ride. They all love it. Without them we wouldn't have been able to do what we've done — our support system is incredible, and we're blessed for each and every one of them. So thank you. All of you. You're all amazing!

Biggest Embarrassment: So...we haven't fully completed our bathrooms yet (which is why you won't see them), but this story is equally embarrassing as it is hilarious. Michael was in the midst of a really bad sinus infection, but anyone who knows him knows he refuses to relax. So he decided it was a good idea to install a new toilet in our master bath. And a "smart toilet" at that.

So, he gets everything prepared and begins to install — but the toilet didn't align with the plumbing. So he packs it up, takes it back to our local Home Depot, and returns it. Then makes his way to the plumbing department to discuss the concern (please note that we know everyone at that store by name, and they know us too, so they had a field day with this). He tells them the dilemma, convinces them to open a box to a new toilet, and then it dawns on him (as everyone around from the department is deep in laughter) that he was installing the toilet upside down...yup, doesn't get much worse than that.

Proudest DIY: Our master bedroom makeover is really amazing. But creating a custom mudroom in our office was everything we ever wanted...so that may take the cake.

Biggest Indulgence: We'll name a few here — our dining room chandelier, our GE Café Range, all of our Nest technology and Dyson fans upstairs (due to the HVAC issues...renovation project to come soon)

Best Advice: Embrace the chaos.

Dream Sources: Do what you love. Find spaces that motivate you to create spaces you want to spend time in. We don't have just one dream source we have many that we've collected along the way.

Resources:

PAINT & COLORS

Hallway, Living Room, Dining Room, and Office — Behr, Ground Fog

Kitchen — Behr

Playroom — Behr, Cotton Gray

Boys bedroom — Behr, Manhattan Mist

Master Bedroom — Sherwin-Williams, March Wind, Iron Ore and High Reflective White

LIVING ROOM

Sofa — Pottery Barn

Throw — MINImalist

Chairs — Pottery Barn

Gold Pouf — Baba Souk

Coffee Table — Wayfair

Honeycomb Side Table — Pottery Barn

End Tables — Target

Lamps — Ralph Lauren

]Rug — Pottery Barn