Quality clothes last longer for the money you spend, they’re more comfortable, and they make you look and feel pretty good while you wear them. Best of all, you can find quality anywhere. It comes down to buying less mediocre stuff and using that money on a few nice things that last forever.

Apply the “Comfort Principle” to Your Clothing

The comfort principle is simple: spend your money where you spend most of your time. That’s why it’s a good idea to splurge on a nice mattress, comfortable desk chair, or a decent laptop computer, considering how many hours a day you sleep, work at your desk, or use that computer. Think about it, most of us wear our clothes all day long (and sometimes through the night). We wear them at work, at home, at the gym: every occasion calls for some type of clothing. It makes sense to buy clothes that earn you the most happiness out of your time, and stand up to regular use. You want work clothes that look good in the office and are comfortable. You want gym clothes that fit well and stand up to your workouts. Because you wear your clothing every day, it can be considered an experiential purchase, which is one of the ways research suggests you can actually “buy” happiness.

Advertisement

Clothing isn’t an investment in the traditional sense (it never gains value, and you’ll never sell an item of clothing for more than it was purchased), but it’s good to think of it like a down payment on your daily comfort, your confidence in your appearance, and the utility of your wardrobe. For example, having a couple pairs of really nice jeans that fit well, make you look good, and last forever is better than having six pairs of jeans that look “okay”, are just kind of comfy, and fall apart after a year. In the same vein, spending $100 on a single high-fashion t-shirt is a bit much, but there’s nothing wrong with spending $40 on a three-pack of nice t-shirts you know you’ll be excited to wear every day. You spend a lot of time in your clothes, so why not spring for nice items you know you’ll wear all the time?

Quality Clothing Makes You Look and Feel Good

People come in all shapes and sizes, yet a lot of cheap clothing is mass produced in a “one shape fits all” manner. Low-quality dress shirts, for example, look terrible on people not shaped a specific way. If a shirt is too loose or tight in the wrong places, you feel vulnerable and uncomfortable, and it shows in your body language. If it fits you well and you’re comfortable, however, you can get a nice confidence boost. Using the same example, quality dress shirts will often come in a variety of cuts, so no matter what shape you are, you’re bound to find one that you feel good wearing. Even if you can’t, you can and should get it fitted to you (more on that later.)

Advertisement

Whether we like it or not, clothing is also a part of our identity. Your clothes can emphasize social status, as well as a certain level of professionalism. A few quality outfits can make you look like a go-getter that takes pride in your appearance. Spending money on quality clothes might seem frivolous if you’re a frugal person, but in some cases you can’t afford to not spend the money, especially if you’re trying to land a job or network with colleagues.

Do the Math Before You Buy

Generally speaking, cheap, throwaway clothes aren’t cheap in the long run. Poorly made clothing with thin material wears out faster and requires you to spend time and money repairing or replacing it. The key isn’t to spend more on clothes across the board, it’s to spend a little more on a few nice items and not butt-loads of crappy items.

This can all be broken down into simple math. Fashion blogger Legos In My Louis recommends you use the “cost per wear” equation. It works like this:

(price of garment + maintenance) divided by the number of times you’ll wear it

Say you bought a nice (but pricey) $100 pair of jeans that will last you five years before they get threadbare and wear out:

$100 + $10 (washing, detergent, stain remover, etc.) / 780 days (roughly three days a week for five years)

That ends up being around 14 cents per wear. Say, instead, you bought a $30 pair of jeans that will last about a year and a half before they fade and wear out:

$30 + $10 (washing, detergent, stain remover, etc.) / 234 days (roughly three days a week for a year and a half)

That ends up being around 17 cents per wear, and you have to go buy a new pair every year and a half. Plus, you’ll probably be more comfortable and look better in the nicer pair. Of course, this equation is only ideal for clothing that gets worn regularly. If you’re only going to wear a swimsuit 10 times in a year, for example, the “cost per wear” equation doesn’t really justify spending hundreds of dollars on it. In that case, a cheap swimsuit will probably last just as long, and save you money that you can spend on the things you wear all the time. Also, it’s hard to know how long clothing will hold up. That’s why it’s essential you do some research before you buy.

Do Your Homework and Avoid Impulse Buys

Cheap clothing also lends itself to constant impulse buying, which can be way more dangerous for your wallet than the occasional splurge on something nice, durable, and well-made. Spending $20 here and there doesn’t feel like much when it happens, but it can add up fast. You could spend more in a year on clothing that way, and possibly end up with a bunch of stuff you’ll never actually wear.

Advertisement

When buying high-quality (and sometimes more expensive) clothes, however, you know you’ll be spending a little more, so you’re more inclined to research before you open your wallet. It’s better to have a wardrobe with a few versatile, durable things you love to wear than a wardrobe stuffed with crap. Marc Bain at The Atlantic explains that buying expensive, high-quality clothing forces him to truly consider each one of his purchases:

The point is to make you pause and ask yourself, “How much do I really want this?” ...it’s enough that it causes me to seriously hesitate, which is the real point. It forces me to think about just how much I want that item of clothing, how much I’ll wear it, and whether I think the value it offers is worth a significant cost… I can’t make these purchases all the time, at least not without sacrificing elsewhere or going broke. It’s an investment, rather than the cheap buzz of getting something new.

It’s always good to have a personal “should I buy this?” test for everything you purchase, but it’s especially important when it’s something you spend so much time with, whether it’s expensive or not. As Heather Levin at Money Crashers explains, having quality clothing in your wardrobe is valuable because you spent more money on it, but also because it means something to you. You devoted real thought and consideration to your purchase, and didn’t just buy because they looked cool on the mannequin when you walked by.

How to Make Sure You Buy Quality Clothing

The most important trademark of quality clothing is its construction. An expensive dress that is made of thin material and poorly sewn isn’t a quality item—it’s just an expensive dress. An expensive dress that fits nicely, is durable, and put together well, however, can definitely be worth the purchase if you like it enough and know you’ll wear it a lot.

If you’re not sure what high-quality looks like, Antonio Centeno from the Real Men Real Style YouTube channel suggests you start by getting a good point of reference. Go to a store you know sells high-quality clothing (even if it’s out of your price range), and look at the details of each garment. Notice how many stitches there are per inch (more is better), what the clothes are made of and how the fabric feels (comfortable but durable), and how well buttons are secured to the garment (a loose button will pop right off). And just because Centeno is talking about dress shirts in the video above doesn’t mean the same tips aren’t helpful for women’s clothing. No matter what types of garments you’re inspecting, it won’t take long for you to see what high-quality garments look and feel like.

Advertisement

Now you can head to a store closer to your usual price range and compare. If you’re looking for a super-quick way to check durability, Levin recommends you go right for the seams. Grip the fabric on both sides and gently pull them away to see if the thread is holding the fabric together tightly. If it gaps or starts to pull apart, it was stitched poorly. Once you know what quality clothing construction looks like, there are a few other simple rules you want to consider while you shop:

As you shop, always remember that expensive doesn’t mean quality, and that you’re not spending more, you’re just buying less. At his financial advice blog, Peter Dunn recommends you create a yearly clothing budget of 5% of your net income (including repairs and tailoring) and stick to it. It’s just enough to add some nice items to your wardrobe, but not so much you’ll break the bank.