Photo

With spring break around the corner, many families will be facing full flights and long road trips. To help maintain order in the back seat and stave off midair meltdowns, do yourself and fellow passengers a favor: Throw out your usual screen time limits and let the children binge on movies and gaming apps for those travel hours.

You can quash parental guilt by loading your phone or tablet with apps designed to get them thinking, not just entertained. (To keep noise at a safe level for small ears, invest in a good set of headphones like the $100 Puro recommended by The Wirecutter, the product recommendations website owned by The New York Times.) I’ve also thrown in some nonelectronic options. As with a previous column, my aim was to find a sweet spot between the addictive thrill of Pokémon Go and the rigor of memorizing multiplication tables. Following are suggestions from professional toy and app reviewers, organized by age.

Ages 1 to 4

Drawing Pad, for iPad, Android, Kindle Fire, $1.99

This mobile studio allows children to create art using digital paintbrushes, markers, crayons, stickers and more. While young artists can use their fingers to draw and paint, older children will enjoy more advanced tools that allow them to save their masterpieces. Another plus: With no cleanup involved, it’s great for families on the go.

Busy Shapes 2, for iPhone, iPod Touch, iPad, $2.99

Players manipulate shapes, through a series of interactive puzzles, dragging, dropping and moving them through the proper holes, while building reasoning skills. Ever-changing backdrops and increasingly challenging situations involving trap doors and sliding platforms keep children interested. “On long trips, apps with lots of levels that encourage problem solving, like Busy Shapes 2, keep children challenged and thinking,” said Christine Elgersma, a senior editor at Common Sense Media, a nonprofit group that helps children and parents navigate media and technology. And knowing the app was inspired by the teachings of the Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget can help reduce the guilt when the children won’t put it down.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Reading Rainbow, for iPad, Kindle Fire, $4.99 a month or $39.99 a year

“Instead of having to lug a whole bag of picture books in a car or on a plane, this is sort of like having that bag of books in an app,” Ms. Elgersma said. This digital remake of the classic children’s television series offers more than 600 children’s books that children can read themselves or listen to. Nostalgic bonus: The ageless LeVar Burton appears as a guide and in videos within the app.