Mercury Retrograde

Mercury Retrograde in Virgo and Leo: August 12 to September 5, 2017

On this Page:

The significance of Mercury Retrograde .

. Indicators in the charts of people especially sensitive to the Mercury Retrograde cycle.

How this Mercury Retrograde cycle affects each sign of the zodiac.

Overview

Although not quite as popular as Sun sign astrology, “Mercury Retrograde” has certainly become a buzzword – or buzz phrase – these days.

What is Mercury Retrograde? Three, and sometimes four, times a year, the planet Mercury appears to be moving backward in the sky for a period of approximately 3 weeks. “Appears” is the key word here, because, technically speaking, no planet actually moves backward in their orbits around the Sun. In fact, they don’t even slow down. Retrograde-station-direct cycles are essentially illusions that result from our point of view from Earth, simply because the Earth is also orbiting the Sun at a different speed than the other planets. Mercury turns retrograde more frequently than any other planet. It can never be more than 28 degrees from the Sun, and whenever it reaches its furthest distance from the Sun, it changes direction.

Mercury is Retrograde in the signs of Virgo and then Leo from August 12th to September 5th, 2017.

July 24/2017 11:15 am EDT 28 Leo 25′ Mercury Enters Rx Zone

August 12/2017 08:56 pm EDT 11 Virgo 38’Rx Mercury Stationary Retrograde

September 5/2017 7:21 am EDT 28 Leo 25’D Mercury Stationary Direct

September 19/2017 12:01 pm EDT 11 Virgo 38′ Mercury Leaves Rx Zone

Times are Eastern

Where is Mercury Retrograde transiting by house in your natal chart? Does it conjunct a natal planet, your Ascendant, or Midheaven? Read interpretations of Mercury Retrograde in Transit for a more personalized meaning of the transit cycle.

See also Retrogrades and Retrogrades in the Natal Chart.

Mercury is retrograde from August 12 to September 5. Mercury’s shadow period begins July 24, 2017, and ends September 19, 2017. Note that the shadow period begins before Mercury turns retrograde–when Mercury first passes over the degree that Mercury later returns to in retrograde motion. The shadow period ends when Mercury again passes over the degree at which it first turned retrograde. The shadow period is different than Mercury’s storm period in astrology, which refers to the period when Mercury is moving especially slowly.

Note that Mercury’s post-retrograde shadow is generally better for new long-term endeavors than the pre-retrogrades shadow. For new enterprises in the pre-retrograde shadow, the venture’s secondary progressed Mercury will turn direction (retrograde) in the coming years which may not be ideal.

Mercury is retrograde approximately three times a year for approximately three weeks each time. As such, retrograde Mercury is a fairly common occurrence (Mercury is retrograde approximately 18% of the time).

As the planet of communication, Mercury retrograde tends to breed a certain level of confusion. Mercury rules our “lower” mind–how we perceive and interpret information that we receive from our environment, and how we relay that information to others. Mercury has rulership over such things as speaking, negotiating, buying and selling, listening, formal contracts, documents, travel, the mail and shipping, and so forth. All of these areas of life are affected when Mercury is functioning in a sluggish state. Decision-making is challenged during Mercury retrograde.

Needless to say, it is not advised to sign contracts, engage in important decision-making, or launch a new business. Delays and challenges are more probable with Mercury retrograde. It’s a time when being careless with money, our personal information, or paperwork can be costly.

While Mercury is retrograde, we may be rethinking a previous opinion or idea. Looking to the signs and houses it transits can give clues as to what we may be reconsidering.

There is absolutely a positive side to Mercury Retrograde. This period is best used for re-organizing and reflecting. We look at the world a little differently–through different filters–and can come up with some very important inner revelations. It may be difficult to communicate them under this influence, but not everything needs to be rationalized.

Mercury retrograde periods can be times of heightened inner awareness, when meditation, benefiting from keeping a journal, reworking old plans, and reviewing past work are favored. Mercury retrograde is powerful for studies, particularly for returning to old studies or for re-learning or refreshing knowledge in a subject already taken.

Minor breaks in the mechanical aspects of communication can actually re-connect us to other means of communication, such as when there is an unexpected power outage and we’re forced off the computer and television, finding different and often satisfying ways to entertain ourselves.

It is important to note that there is absolutely no reason to suspend projects or anything of the sort during the Mercury Retrograde cycle. It’s not an ideal time to start new ones or to sign contracts, simply because a change of mind is quite likely once Mercury turns direct. However, it’s a fabulous time to do some “outside of the box” thinking. Acting on our ideas, however, might be best left for a Mercury Direct period.

Not everyone feels the stronger effects of Mercury retrograde. Some people born with Mercury retrograde in their natal chart, for example, feel that they don’t experience the effects described above as intensely as others, while others do.

When Mercury is retrograde in the natal chart itself, the thinking processes are generally more acute, and the sense of humor rather quirky. People with Mercury retrograde take in information differently than those with Mercury direct in their natal charts. How many people are born with a retrograde Mercury? Roughly 18%.

Pay close attention to what you say and communicate in general, particularly around the days of Mercury’s stations (August 12th and September 5th), as well as around retrograde Mercury’s conjunction to the Sun on August 26th (midway between the start and end of the retro period). If you are itching to make a point with someone, especially, or if you are planning on “signing on the dotted line,” try to hold off. It is likely that you will have a change of mind once the station passes, and you can do some damage in the meantime. When a planet stations, its energies are very strong in our lives. When Mercury stations, communications have more impact, so that negative ones could have long-term implications at this time. However, if you are very clear within yourself and about what you are communicating, this can be a positive thing.

With Mercury retrograde in Virgo and Leo: We might look at past decisions and ideas from a new, possibly enlightened perspective, although we may be especially analytical and critical, perhaps to excess while Mercury is retrograde in Virgo (until the 31st). We may be returning to past projects and refining or tweaking them. We may feel stuck in the past if we continually redo and don’t feel satisfied with the results, however. We can find usefulness in old or past ideas and recycling them in new ways. This is a good time for reviewing recent work, as long as we don’t get caught in a loop of perfectionism. We might discover new ways of doing work that has become routine, or we might consider renewing old self-care, health, or fitness programs. Plans may be considered then reconsidered. We are in a good position to reevaluate our routines and habits, and we might give more thought to the meaning of our work or services.

Mercury retrograde in Leo from August 31-September 5th is a time for learning (or relearning) what we love doing, looking back to analyze past romantic relationships or creative projects, and for preparing, rehearsing, and redoing scenarios before expressing them.

Retrograde Mercury aligns with the Sun in Virgo on August 26th, bringing illumination to our thoughts. This inferior conjunction presents a favorable time for processing recent events and ideas, and for beginning to look at problems or issues from a new perspective and with a new understanding. What we say or write now has an impact, for better or for worse! Significant new ideas can be birthed at this time.

Mercury begins retracing its steps in direct motion from September 5th (its shadow ends on September 19th).

It’s also interesting to note that Mercury returns to 28 degrees Leo before moving direct again, and this is approximately the same position of the total Solar Eclipse on August 21st. Retrograde Mercury also aligns with Mars at this eclipse point on September 2-3. These days can be very loaded and significant.

People don’t say what they mean, or mean what they say!

Mercury Retrograde through the Signs – August 12-September 5, 2017

Some people are more sensitive to Mercury retrograde cycles than others. Mercury-ruled Gemini and Virgo natives are likely to be particularly sensitive to the effects of Mercury Retrograde in general. This applies to anyone who has a number of planets in either sign. Also, check to see where Gemini and Virgo are found in your natal chart. If Virgo is on the third house cusp, for example, (which is often the case for Cancer Ascendant natives) communication issues may be especially strong. If either of these signs is on the fifth house, then we can expect some communication problems with people associated with the fifth house–lovers and children, for example.

Aries and Aries Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications in general and job or health-related communications because Mercury rules these areas of your life in your solar chart. There can be delays or rethinking with these matters. You can benefit from doing important editing work on projects in progress. Occurring in your solar fifth and sixth houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to romance, children, creativity, work, and daily routines. Be as non- judgmental as you can with co-workers, romantic partners, and your children. Re- thinking the suitability of your job and/or romantic relationships is possible now, but you should avoid jumping to any premature decisions. Work-related mess-ups can frustrate you. Double-check your work. There may be the need to revisit old issues with your children or lover, or there could be some communication problems with the same. Arguments with a lover may be blown out of proportion far too easily. Both you and your lover should avoid harping on the words used and try to get to the meaning behind the words instead. Or, a romance may not be moving forward in obvious ways. It might seem like stagnation, but it's actually a period of review and rest. Other possibilities include calls that are not returned, a lover is late for a date, or dates get cancelled. Speculation and gambling are not advised right now. Things will change once Mercury turns direct, so you might decide to try to keep status quo for the time being. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with co-workers, professors, lawyers, romantic partners, and children, or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Taurus and Taurus Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications with lovers or children, and regarding financial affairs, because Mercury rules these areas of your life in your solar chart. Your judgment with regards to personal finances (Gemini-ruled for you) as well as romantic partners and creative endeavors may not be up to par just now, so do avoid “signing on the dotted line”. Speculation is not advised during this cycle.

Occurring in your solar fourth and fifth houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to family relations, romance, children, and creativity. Be as non- judgmental as you can with family members. New initiatives surrounding home and property are best left for a better time. Re-thinking your romantic relationships or creative projects is possible now, but you should avoid jumping to any premature decisions. There may also be the need to revisit old, nagging issues with family members, or there could be some communication problems with them. Family members may be on edge. Try to hold off on household repairs if you can. Put off decision-making with regards to home improvement, moving, and family matters for the time being. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with friends, groups, intimate partners, family members, romantic partners, and children, or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Gemini and Gemini Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of your personal presentation or image to others and communications with family because Mercury rules these areas of your life. Because Mercury is your sign’s ruler, all of the common Mercury Retrograde issues may apply. Put off making important decisions with regards to family and domestic matters (Virgo-ruled for you) just now, and take care when it comes to communicating with family members. Look at domestic matters from a different angle – review and reflect.

Occurring in your solar third and fourth houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to composing letters, emails, phone calls, and family relations. Be as non- judgmental as you can with family members. New initiatives surrounding home and property are best left for a better time. There may be the need to revisit old, nagging issues with siblings or neighbors, errands could go wrong, you might have trouble getting from point A to point B (example, transportation problems), emails or letters get lost, and so forth. Idle chit-chatting during this period may have repercussions! People might be misunderstanding your words. You may be forgetful during this cycle, and it makes sense to allow yourself extra time to get to appointments, if they are not cancelled in the first place! It would also be wise to double-check your work and communications before sending them off.

Cancer and Cancer Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of personal communications in general as well as communications about the past because Mercury rules these areas of your life. Your intuition usually serves you very well, but may not be up to par for the time being. Take care when it comes to presenting ideas, writing letters, and any detail work. You may not be seeing the whole picture.

Occurring in your solar second and third houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to new financial initiatives, composing letters, emails, and phone calls, as well as communicating with neighbors and siblings. Back up your computer and allow sufficient time for delays or transportation mishaps when going for appointments. As well, it would be wise to choose your words carefully. What you say or write can too easily be misinterpreted during this period. There may be the need to revisit old, nagging issues regarding personal finances. Take this time to re-budget instead of making premature purchases. Hold off on decision-making regarding money. Instead, take the time to re-think your sources of income and how you spend your cash during this period, but put off finalizing anything important for the time being. In fact, some money-making ideas or ventures may be put on hold due to circumstances beyond your control. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with co-workers, neighbors, and acquaintances, or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Leo and Leo Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of personal finances, as well as communications with friends or groups, because Mercury rules these areas of your solar chart. Major financial initiatives should be avoided. Remember that friends don’t mean what they say and don’t say what they mean, and take what you hear with a grain of salt. Group meetings may be delayed or canceled.

Occurring in your solar first and second houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to new financial initiatives and body language. Reviewing your budget rather than jumping into new purchases is in order now. Go over any financial documents carefully. Others may misinterpret your body language, and you should be aware of a tendency to give off mixed signals. People in your life may complain that you seem emotionally distant. You may appear uncommunicative and hard to reach, or what you say comes out wrong. Don't worry too much if others aren't quite "getting" you for the time being. Things will change once Mercury turns direct, so you might decide to try to keep status quo for the time being. Take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Virgo and Virgo Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of your own body language and personal manner (you may feel that others misunderstand you), as well as communications involving the career or public, because Mercury rules these areas of your solar chart. You are ruled by Mercury, so the likelihood of being misunderstood, in general, is high. Put off career decisions as well, as career matters are Gemini-ruled for you.

Occurring in your solar twelfth and first houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to body language and intuition. Others may misinterpret your body language, and you should be aware of a tendency to give off mixed signals. People in your life may complain that you seem emotionally distant. This is a time to review the manner in which you come across to others--not so much whether it truly reflects your nature, but more in terms of whether it is working for or against you. You may find that you are less able to rely on your intuition. Perhaps you're picking up the wrong cues or reading too much into situations. Whatever the case may be, for the time being, you may not feel that your intuition is serving you well. Be as non-judgmental as you can, but do keep an eye out for deceptiveness and falseness in others. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with close partners and family members; or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Libra and Libra Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications involving legal affairs, travel, and education, as well as communications about the past, because Mercury rules these areas of your life. With Virgo ruling your twelfth house sector, somebody might be deceiving you or working against you, or nagging issues from the past may crop up and demand attention. Put off making solid travel plans if possible.

Occurring in your solar eleventh and twelfth houses this time, your instinctual judgment may be compromised, and extra care should be used when communicating with friends. You may find that communications with friends or with groups can easily get sticky. Group meetings may be postponed or cancelled, and friends may be uncommunicative or giving off mixed signals. On the other hand, old acquaintances may appear during this cycle. You may find that you are less able to rely on your intuition. Perhaps you're picking up the wrong cues or reading too much into situations. Whatever the case may be, for the time being, you may not feel that your intuition is serving you well. Be as non- judgmental as you can, but do keep an eye out for deceptiveness and falseness in others. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with friends and co-workers during this cycle; or, better yet, take this time to rethink concerns and grievances before talking about them prematurely.

Scorpio and Scorpio Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications with friends or groups, as well as intimate communications and shared financial resources, because Mercury rules these areas of your life. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to financial transactions and personal communications with friends, or, better yet, take this time to re-budget or rethink your plans instead of taking premature action. Group meetings may be postponed or canceled, and friends may seem distant or confused.

Occurring in your solar tenth and eleventh houses this time, extra care should be exercised when communicating with friends, superiors, and co-workers. You may find that communications with bosses and co-workers, and other professional matters, can be tricky. Strive to be as clear as possible so that you are not misunderstood when dealing with the public. Put off making career decisions as much as possible for the time being. You may be re-thinking things regarding your life path, but it's best to think rather than act for now, as your judgment may be compromised. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with authority figures, children, and intimate partners during this cycle; or, better yet, take this time to rethink concerns and grievances before talking about them prematurely.

Sagittarius and Sagittarius Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications with bosses or in your career in general, as well as communications with a close partner, because Mercury rules these areas of your life. An argument over joint finances can also get you into hot water. Hold back. Because Virgo and Gemini are on the angles of your chart, you may be especially sensitive to all of the common Mercury Retrograde issues.

Occurring in your solar ninth and tenth houses this time, extra care should be used when communicating with superiors and co-workers, and regarding travel or education plans. Delays are very possible. You may be re-thinking things regarding your life path, but it's best to think rather than act for now, as your judgment may be compromised. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with co-workers, professors, lawyers, and family members, or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Capricorn and Capricorn Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications regarding travels, legal matters, or opinions, as well as communications on the job and with co-workers, because Mercury rules these areas of your life. It’s best not to sign on the dotted line for the time being, especially when it comes to making travel plans or any legal contracts. There could be irritating mess-ups on the job. You might be inclined to miss important details in your paperwork, or might experience frustrating delays that result from co-workers’ errors. Travel plans may go awry, or you may have a change of heart.

Occurring in your solar eighth and ninth houses this time, extra care should be exercised regarding travel or education plans, and with any financial initiatives that involve shared resources. Delays are very possible when it comes to transportation, receiving support, loans, and taxes. There may be delays regarding financial support, loans, or taxes. It may be better to side-step arguments with loved ones that revolve around intimacy and sexuality. Investments made now may not go the way you want them to, particularly those involving joint finances. It may be hard to rely on the input of your partner now, and money you were counting on may not be forthcoming. It's best to budget rather than spend. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with professors, lawyers, acquaintances, and intimate partners, or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Aquarius and Aquarius Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications regarding intimate and financial matters, as well as communications with children or romantic partners, because Mercury rules these areas of your life. It’s not a good time to file your taxes or apply for a loan. Instead, take the time to re-think your sources of income and how you spend your cash during this period, but put off finalizing anything for the time being. Speculation and gambling are not advised right now either.

Occurring in your solar seventh and eighth houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to negotiations, one-on-one communications, and any financial initiatives that involve shared resources. Be as non-judgmental as you can with a partner. There may be the need to revisit old issues in a partnership, or there could be some communication problems with a partner. An ex-partner may resurface during this cycle. Delays are very possible when it comes to receiving support, loans, and taxes. It may be better to side-step arguments with loved ones that revolve around intimacy and sexuality. Investments made now may not go the way you want them to, particularly those involving joint finances. It may be hard to rely on the input of your partner now, and money you were counting on may not be forthcoming. It's best to budget rather than spend. Misunderstandings with your partner now can do some damage if you (or your partner) focus on words said instead of the meanings behind the words. If you need to talk through problems, do your best to be as non-judgmental as possible, and don't over- react to what your partner has to say either. Mixed messages coming from a partner, or a disappointment, could occur now. You may not be as adept at mediating disputes for the time being, but it's a good cycle in which to improve your negotiation skills. Re-thinking a partnership arrangement is possible now, but you should avoid jumping to any premature decisions. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with partners; or take this time to re-examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

Pisces and Pisces Ascendant: All Mercury retrograde cycles particularly affect you in terms of communications with a partner or about partnerships, as well as communications with or about family and home, because Mercury rules these areas of your life. It will be important to avoid signing any contracts or making important partnership or family/home decisions during this cycle.

Occurring in your solar sixth and seventh houses this time, extra care should be exercised when it comes to negotiations, work, and one-on-one communications. Be as non- judgmental as you can with a partner and with co-workers. There may be the need to revisit old issues in a partnership, or there could be some communication problems with a partner. An ex-partner may resurface during this cycle. Misunderstandings with your partner now can do serious damage if you (or your partner) focus on words said instead of meanings behind the words. If you need to talk through problems, do your best to be as non-judgmental as possible, and don't over-react to what your partner has to say either. Mixed messages coming from a partner, or a disappointment, could occur now. You may not be as good at mediating disputes for the time being, but it's a good cycle in which to improve your negotiation skills. Re-thinking a partnership or a job is possible now, but you should avoid jumping to any premature decisions. It would be wise to be especially clear when it comes to communicating with partners, co-workers, and superiors, or take this time to re- examine issues rather than communicating about them prematurely.

See also: Year 2017 Horoscope Overviews

See also: Monthly Horoscopes

See the Transits of Retrograde Mercury page.

Back to This Week in Astrology.

Back to The Astrology of Year 2017.