I'm not what you would call a whiz in the kitchen. I put ketchup on my eggs and most of my meals into the microwave. Seamless is my friend. When I was a kid, my family's specialty was what we called an "if it" dinner: "If you can find it, you can eat it."

Part of my aversion to cooking is that recipes oftentimes call for a tablespoon or a quarter of a cup of something that is only sold in 28 ounces or what seems like gallon form. After I cook the latest dish that's making the rounds on Pinterest, what am I supposed to do with the rest of the fish oil or this mountain of cilantro?

Meanwhile, I will admit to not knowing what some of the ingredients listed in popular recipes actually are, or where I might find them in the local supermarket. If a recipe has more than a handful of ingredients, it's usually not for me.

And so, I was intrigued when my sister started using Blue Apron, a food delivery service that provides you with exactly the amount of ingredients you will need to make a given meal for two, four, or six people. If you only need a tablespoon of soy sauce, that's all you get. No more feeling like you're wasting food.

But is it really that simple? Surely, having food delivered to your door has to be prohibitively expensive. And won't it go bad? I signed on for Blue Apron to find out.

Setting Up an Account

The minimum plan on Blue Apron is three meals per week, each of which feed two people, for $60. But you can also opt for food to feed four or six people.

Blue Apron will ask if you're a vegetarian, but also provides the option to opt-out of meals with beef, lamb, poultry, pork, fish, or shellfish. I don't have any food restrictions, so I signed up for whatever they wanted to give me.

Blue Apron will automatically sign you up for weekly deliveries, but you can cancel at any time, provided you give them 6-7 days notice since they start packing up your weekly delivery a few days in advance. You can also skip a week if you're going out of town, or want a break from culinary adventures.

Delivery

As for delivery, you can select from a number of delivery windows, on Monday through Friday. My sister lives in a house in Northern Virginia, and FedEx drops the package on her front step every Friday. Since I live in a Brooklyn apartment and don't have a doorman, I didn't want the package to be stolen or ransacked by area critters, so I had it delivered to the PCMag offices on Thursdays. Blue Apron will ask you if your package is being delivered to a residence or a business, so even though my delivery window is 8am to 8pm, it's always arrived during business hours with our office's regular FedEx deliveries.

The box looks big, but most of the bulk and heft is due to the padding, as well as the ice packs that keep the food cold and fresh. Get rid of that, and I've been able to fit all the ingredients for three days in a reusable grocery bag and transport them home without incident.

But is the food any good? Read on to find out what's cooking.