Let’s face it, one of the most expensive things within our bedroom decorating is the bed. A cool bed becomes the focal point of the room, so you want to make sure it looks up to date, stylish and, best case scenario, totally awesome! Best way to do that, on a budget? DIY bed frames! Yes, you can build bed frames that rivals the high end stores, and that also saves you money. And we have a bunch of DIY bed frame tutorials to prove it. So get ready for your bedroom makeover, because once you have one of these beds in your room, you won’t be able to stop decorating.

Nat Andrews posted this DIY bed frame to Instructables, and it is incredibly awesome. High quality wood beds are hard enough to find and afford as it is, but add in some cool details like integrated lighting, and this is a very cool DIY project. Great tutorial, lots of instructions.

This Pottery Barn inspired king bed and headboard by Kristen at ‘Lipstick and Sawdust’ is a more traditional bed, but with a really fresh feel. You could stain it a lighter color, or even paint it white for a different feel. Tutorial is in several parts, so make sure you visit them all. Also, she does a great job of helping you learn from her mistakes, so read the tutorial all the way through! Lovin’ these bed frames!

From Santiago DIY, create a DIY pallet bed. This is a repurposed bed that you see all the time on Pinterest, but few actual tutorials. This one is really good, and tells you exactly how to turn a cheap or free pallet into a platform bed frame.

Now that you have a good pallet bed tutorial, here are a few inspirational ideas on what you can do with pallets and bed frames!

So if you love dupes, this is a great one. This is a George Nelson Case Study bed from Modernica, made DIY by Mid Century Modern. The first photo is the Modernica bed priced at almost $2000 for a queen. The second is the case study bed dupe… They spent $350 building their bed! Nice job.

From Erich Mcvey on Design Sponge, this very cool barn wood bed has a short tutorial… but if you like this bed, make sure you check out the next project as well…

As promised, we found what looks like a bed inspired by the last one…except this one looks just as cool with a complete step by step tutorial! ‘Mrs Fancy Pantz’ did an amazing job on this DIY bed frame and headboard!

Ana White is one of our favorite bloggers because she puts out these amazing woodworking plans for free! And ‘Bower Power’ used one of those plans to build this bed, and it’s king size. They built this bed for around $150… not bad! I love that painted white it looks quite cottage, but it could also be painted a darker color of a more traditional look.

The Caldwell Couple used Ana’s plans to make this DIY girls’ bed… so cute! Full instructions and links to where you need to go to get the plans.

Steve prefers a California King bed… I personally don’t get it, it’s likely sleeping on a football field. But then, I’m not 6′ 3″! This Cal King farmhouse bed tutorial by Ana White is the ultimate DIY bed frame!

Ok, last Ana White design… can’t help it, they are so good! The Happy Huntsman made this DIY storage bed… This is a great choice for a small home, or for kids rooms! You can find the plans for this bed on Ana White.

Last we have the bed that Chris made, a DIY bed frame from ‘Something is Done’. I love this bed because it is simple enough to be used in any style, but can have a headboard added on if you wanted. Great project!

We have so much fun finding great DIY projects for our readers that will save them money! So do you have a favorite of these DIY bed frames? If you are looking for another type of bed project, try our DIY storage bed or our master bedroom makeover tutorials!





SaveSave