I’m so so excited to tell you that I made it to the FINALS of the Apartment Therapy’s Homies (Best Home Project & DIY Blogs)!!! Woohoo! Thanks so much for voting. I so appreciate all your amazing support. Unfortunately I have to beg you again to vote. Shamelessly begging is key here because I’m totally the underdog here 😉 Click HERE to head on over to give me another vote. It takes a while for the page to load. Voting ends on Wednesday.

And speaking of page loading. This page probably takes longer to load as well because I have lots of photos and even an animated gif to show you how to make one of these abstract paintings from my gallery post last week (click HERE if you missed it).

Here is what you will need:

• a canvas

• gold leaf and sealer (usually gets sold together)

• artist spatula (my secret weapon)

• acrylic artist paint of your choice (brand doesn’t really matter)

• (sometimes I use a heard bristle artist brush but usually I don’t)

Then I just randomly distribute globs of paint on the canvas:

That’s where the spatula comes in place. It’s like applying a messy coat of cake icing.

Randomness is key here:

I spread out the white first and then slowly work in the color.

You can add as many colors as you would like.

Then I add the gold foil randomly into the wet paint:

When the gold foil is pressed into the paint, I lightly go over the edges with the spatula and a little bit of paint to make the edges look more random.

Then I let the paint dry and apply some gold leaf sealer to the golden areas.

You can also paint the side of the canvas gold or add a frame.

That’s it all done!

EASY RIGHT?

A slow demonstration for you:

And here is another video tutorial of a different painting I made for beginners:

Also see how to paint this brushstroke art by clicking HERE. Or if you are into abstract black and white art then check out this post HERE:

And did you know you can download and print affordable art from Etsy? (click HERE)



You should give it a try. It really is very easy.

I hope you liked the tutorial and let me know if you have any questions.

Talk to you on Wednesday.

Tschüß

(Youleeya)