Mercedes-Benz GP

Mercedes-Benz GP

Williams

Renault Sport

Renault Sport

Sauber

Sauber

Sahara Force India

Sahara Force India

Formula 1 is set to be a radically different sport in 2017, and that mainly has to do with the change in ownership. Long-time F1 supremo Bernie Ecclestone has been shuffled out by new owner Liberty Media, replaced by a three-person team with Chase Carey as CEO, Sean Bratches as head of commercial operations, and legendary engineer Ross Brawn overseeing the sporting and technical stuff. But the changes for this season aren't solely in the boardroom. 2017's F1 cars have a few notable changes compared to recent years, and this week the teams started pulling off the dust sheets to show us.

Bigger Tires

For one thing, the tires are bigger. F1 is still sticking with those silly 13-inch wheels, but they're about 25 percent wider this year: 305mm up front (compared to 245mm last year) and a whopping 405mm at the back (up from 325mm). Pirelli has also been told to make tires that won't rapidly degrade, which means an end to drivers cruising around many seconds a lap slower than their cars are capable. (The tire company was instructed to make those rubbish tires on purpose following an exciting race in Canada in 2010, except that race was exciting because the teams were all reacting to the unknown. Once everyone knew how the new tires would behave, the racing turned out to be dull as dishwater.)

More downforce

Second, the cars and their wings are wider than before. Overall car width has increased to 2,000mm, front wings are now 1,800mm wide (vs. 1,650mm before), and the rear wing is both lower (800mm vs. 950mm) and wider (950mm vs. 750mm). Finally, the rear diffuser is also bigger than in 2016. Together with the new tires, that means a 2017 F1 car should lap 3-5 seconds quicker than last year's model, marking the first time in recent history this author can remember the sport doing something to make the cars go faster instead of reining them in.

Another change is the return of the "Big Honking Fin" behind the engine covers of some, but not all, cars. Originally added to Le Mans prototypes as a way to prevent them from getting airborne, the cynic in me thinks they're back because it means more square footage to advertise on.

Better racing?

Of course, there's still plenty of debate as to whether these tweaks will improve the racing spectacle. The gains in lap times will come in large part from much faster cornering speeds and shorter braking distances. If anything, that's going to make overtaking even harder than before. Turbulent air from the car in front means it'll be harder to stay close to a rival's tail through the turns, and shorter braking distances mean less opportunities to actually complete a pass. Ask almost any professional racing driver and they'll tell you: downforce has been the enemy of good racing and it's getting worse.

Still, plenty of people are looking forward to seeing their favorite drivers having to work harder behind the wheel. Those higher cornering speeds mean greater G-forces, although we're only talking about the level of G-loading experienced by F1 drivers in the early 2000s.

So far, Williams, Force India, Sauber, Renault, and defending champions Mercedes have unveiled their 2017 F1 cars. Check back in a few days to see the new contenders from Ferrari, McLaren, Haas, Red Bull, and Toro Rosso.

Listing image by Mercedes-Benz GP