David M. Wood, president of the Association of Bridal Consultants, said part of the problem is that most brides are first-time shoppers. They are less informed about what a “fair” price is, or how long it should take to discover prices. (If you just spent two hours going through different bouquet and centerpiece pricing options at one florist, you might assume that it will take the same amount of time at other vendors and decide it’s too much of a hassle to shop around.) Because this event is (ideally) once in a lifetime, that also means that vendors can appeal to consumers’ sentimentality, urging them not to cheap out on the “most important” day of their lives. Because of similar concerns about guilt-tripping salespeople, the Federal Trade Commission requires funeral homes to provide its bereaved customers with an itemized price list.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Many in the wedding industry wielded this once-in-a-lifetime logic, explaining to me that wedding services are not standardized enough to create a meaningful price aggregator. With books, there’s a single bar code for each product, but it’s hard to do apples-to-apples pricing comparisons between wedding bands or photographers. This argument isn’t incredibly compelling. After all, I can see prices for highly differentiated food-delivery options on sites like Seamless. Locality, a start-up, has been collecting and publishing a menu of prices for services usually considered highly nonstandardized, like massages, day care and dentist visits. Creating something similar for wedding services should not be insurmountably difficult.

But even if some company swooped in and lowered search costs, that doesn’t necessarily mean that prices would fall as a result. Vendors could counteract the decrease in search costs by finding ways to make prices more difficult to compare — something known as “obfuscation,” studied by the M.I.T. economists Glenn Ellison and Sara Fisher Ellison. Sellers could obfuscate prices by giving different product names to an identical item, depending on which store is selling it, as the mattress industry has been accused of doing. Or they might lower prices for the specific keyword consumers search for, but then compensate with hidden fees or required add-on purchases. Many New York venue-based caterers quote a price per guest in the form of “[price] plus plus,” as in “$180 plus plus,” with one “plus” referring to taxes and the other “plus” referring to a “service” or “administrative” fee, which ranges somewhat arbitrarily from 18 to 25 percent, depending on the venue. This makes it very difficult to compare prices even when they’re aggregated side by side — similar to the rise of baggage fees on airlines in the age of Orbitz.

Ultimately, it may be that prices are not the primary attribute upon which people are searching for wedding vendors. By way of analogy, even if notoriously opaque health-care providers started posting prices upfront, patients still wouldn’t all flock to the lowest-cost brain surgeon. When it comes to services like weddings and delicate operations, consumers typically care about other qualities more, and so providing more price transparency might not change consumers’ choices.

Which brings us to the matter of those wedding-dream-board makers. Strong consumer preferences — about the flower type, bridesmaid dress, cake decorations, music style, whatever — mean less price sensitivity (what economists refer to as greater demand inelasticity). If the cocktail napkins must be blue, the happy couple will be willing to pay more for blue. So if there are enough brides out there with strong and specific preferences, who want their weddings to be the special day they always dreamed of, that’s going to push equilibrium prices higher, no matter how transparently they are displayed. In other words, the Bridezillas keep prices high for the rest of us.