January tends to be when we (once again) start to pay attention to our waistlines and health. Some employees turn to their company’s wellness program to achieve their weight loss goals; many employers now provide these programs in an effort to help employees maintain their health and to reduce health care costs. But employees should consider the risks associated with wellness programs.

The workplace wellness program industry in the U.S. is estimated to be worth nearly $6 billion, with vendors selling companies either stand-alone programs or ones that are an optional part of health insurance. Although some studies have questioned the efficacy of wellness programs for reducing employers’ health care costs, and some researchers have accused wellness programs of actually hurting employees’ wellness by causing more stress, these programs continue to proliferate.

More than two-thirds of all U.S.-based employers offer some type of wellness program. A Kaiser Family Foundation report shows that 99% of firms with 200 or more workers offered at least one wellness program in 2013. Of these employers, 69% offered gym membership discounts or on-site gyms, 71% offered smoking cessation programs, and 58% offered weight loss programs. The majority of these firms also offered some financial incentive, such as the reduction of insurance premiums, for employees to participate. Another report found that in 2015 companies with more than 20,000 employees offered an average of $878 to encourage workers to participate, while companies with 5,000 to 20,000 workers offered $661 (up from $493 in 2014).

Without proper oversight, the health data collection that’s part of workplace wellness programs may put employees’ privacy, and potentially even employment, at risk.

In a California Law Review paper, my coauthors and I found that there are insufficient protections for employee health data, leaving workers vulnerable to privacy invasion and employment discrimination. Most notable, wellness program vendors are able to amass a trove of health information through questionnaires and medical exams. Laws such as the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act prohibit employers from collecting health data information from employees, but certain rules exempt health data collection by wellness programs.

Often employees are not informed before joining a wellness program that vendors may sell the health information they collect. This does not appear to be well-known among employers, either. Some vendors are for-profit entities and are not connected to a health insurance carrier, which means that much of the information their programs collect exists in a legal gray area, since that information is not protected by laws such as the Health Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). Generally, HIPAA requires the consent and notice of the patient before private health information acquired at a doctor’s office, clinic, hospital, or other health care provider is transferred to third parties. But for stand-alone wellness program vendors who are not considered health care providers, the information they collect is not covered by HIPAA, and they may sell health data to third parties without informing employees. This puts employees at risk of having their data used unlawfully and could create legal liabilities for employers.

Even if a wellness program vendor does not sell the information it collects, employees’ data may still be compromised due to data breaches. In my earlier research I discovered that large databases containing health information are an attractive target for hackers. Workplace wellness programs can therefore put employees at risk if the data is not strongly secured; a hack could result in medical identity theft or personal health information being sold to data brokers. This may also create liability for employers if they do not provide adequate oversight in keeping employees’ data secure.

In addition to medical exams and family history questionnaires, wellness programs can obtain information from electronic wearable devices given to employees to help track exercise or sleep routines. However, research has shown that the data from fitness trackers can be irregular and unreliable (for example, they are not able to track all forms of exercise). This can lead employees to rely on inaccurate assessments of their health and their health risks.

Wearable companies and wellness program vendors are unregulated, so they can devise their own standards of interpreting the data and measuring an employee’s health status and risks. Their recommendations do not always match up with rapidly advancing medical and health research. For example, many wellness programs use BMI as a measure for obesity, but current medical research has shown that this measure is not appropriate for all individuals, as muscular individuals will code as obese although they are not. This might result in wellness programs recommending a weight loss program for individuals who do not need one.

Another problem is figuring out who owns the data collected from these devices. By law, the device given to an employee remains the property of the employer, meaning that the employer can access its data at any time, without permission from the employee. This unimpeded access to employee health information threatens worker privacy and puts the employer at greater risk for employment discrimination lawsuits based on disability.

How Can Employees Mitigate the Risks?

Employees who wish to join a workplace wellness program should carefully read the consent forms for health data collection and make sure they understand what data will be collected and how it will be used — both by the third-party vendor and by the employer. Employees should demand assurances from their employer that their health data won’t affect any employment decisions. They should ask about the risk of their data being hacked or compromised and that their data be destroyed once they are no longer in the program.

What Can Companies Do?



Employers who want to offer wellness programs should understand the potential legal liabilities, particularly those tied to the collection of big data, and take steps to minimize them. For one, to lower the risk of employment discrimination, employers should create an information wall between themselves and their wellness program vendors, effectively shielding the employees’ health information from the employer’s overview, to ensure that genetic or disability information does not factor into employment decisions.

Although the workplace wellness program is a largely unregulated industry, employers should abide by voluntary ethical frameworks. These would suggest, for example, that employers only work with vendors who have stringent standards for data security and those who offer health recommendations to employees that are based on current, peer-reviewed medical research. Employers should allow employees to retain control of their personal health data and have a say in the sale and transfer of that data. Employers should always obtain employees’ informed consent about wellness programs by making them aware of all the data risks associated with joining.