With his latest culinary innovation, France’s favorite gastronomic mad scientist hopes to do nothing less than eradicate world hunger.

Photo



HERVÉ THIS CARRIES what he believes is the solution to one of the world’s greatest problems in a jumble of vials stuffed into a battered leather valise. From his lab in Paris, where he is considered a national treasure (he co-created molecular gastronomy in 1988 and now heads the prestigious food division of the French Academy of Agriculture), This has taken his bag of magic tricks to top cooking schools in Copenhagen and Lisbon, to formal dinners in Hong Kong and Quebec and to research facilities that he is establishing in Seoul and Buenos Aires.

This’s big idea is nothing less than the eradication of world hunger, which he plans to accomplish not with any new economic overhaul, but through a culinary innovation that he calls note-by-note cooking, or NbN. Molecular cuisine — the deconstruction of food into a series of highly alchemized individual textures, flavors and compounds, often in the form of foams, gels and other matter not immediately recognizable as food — is associated with intellectual-culinary concept art of the sort practiced by Heston Blumenthal of the Fat Duck and René Redzepi of Noma. But This’s ambitions for his new cuisine are far from fanciful — indeed, the 60-year-old chemist, an impish and rumpled Dumbledore without the facial hair, often sounds more like a political radical than a food scientist. ‘‘I work for the public,’’ he says. ‘‘I hate rich people. NbN is a new art for chefs, and art is important. But are we going to feed humankind — or just make something for foodies?’’

ACCORDING TO THIS, one of the reasons there isn’t enough food to go around is because when we transport it, what we’re really transporting is water, which makes food spoil. A carrot is mostly water. Same for a tomato, an apple, an eggplant and many other fruits and vegetables. Unless they’re refrigerated, which is expensive and has a nasty impact on the environment, their moist nutrients provide an optimal environment for microorganisms.

Photo

This proposes that we stop shipping ‘‘wet’’ foods across countries or continents and instead break them down into their parts: separating their nutrients and flavors into a wide variety of powders and liquids that are theoretically shelf-stable in perpetuity, and can be used as ingredients. Many of the basic components of food have unwieldy names but familiar tastes or smells. Allyl isothiocyanate, a compound obtained from mustard seeds, suggests wasabi; 1-octen-3-ol evokes wild mushrooms. Depending on its concentration, benzyl mercaptan may call to mind garlic, horseradish, mint or coffee; decanal hints at something between an orange and an apricot. ‘‘Nobody knows why the same compound in different strengths may taste like curry or maple syrup,’’ This says. ‘‘The physiology of taste is an exciting field — my colleagues are discovering new things every month.’’

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Other compounds provide color, texture, freshness or mouth feel: In gel form, agar-agar is firm and brittle and kappa-carrageenan is elastic. Each of This’s NbN dishes is built compound by compound, using food’s internal building blocks while retaining all its nutrients. Carefully mix and match a few compounds or use them to enhance inexpensive ‘‘real’’ foods, and voilà — you have a way to feed large numbers of people satisfying and nutritionally complete meals for very little money. ‘‘I hope this will be food in 20 years,’’ says This, whose parents, an obstetrician and a psychoanalyst, gave him his first chemistry set when he was 6.

Photo

Right now, most of the ingredients for the still esoteric NbN pantry can be found online from scientific suppliers — they’re made by dozens of companies around the world — but This envisions grocery stores of the future selling peachy hexyl acetate and cucumberish trans,cis-2,6-nonadien-1-ol; no crazier than the bottle of vanilla extract or oil of oregano found in most homes. ‘‘I have 100 spices in my kitchen,’’ he says. ‘‘Why not the same amount of compounds?’’ (NbN cooking was born when This realized that he could make cheap whiskey taste expensive merely by adding a few drops of vanillin, the main compound that gives a vanilla bean its distinctive flavor.)