Candy Corn and White Chocolate Softbatch Cookies

Candy corn. Oh, the memories of a few pieces clanking against the bottom of my trick-or-treating bucket.

On Halloween houses that ran out of Fun-Size Snickers or so-called ‘good’ candy used to toss out candy corn.

After seeing it recently appear in stores for the season I promptly tossed it into my cart not knowing for sure what I was going to make with it.

I baked it into the most soft, tender, buttery cookie dough base in my cookie arsenal. And then I added white chocolate chips.

MY OTHER RECIPES MY OTHER RECIPES

I used a dough base I haven’t used in about a year. It’s one I used for both Maraschino Cherry White Chocolate Cookies and Cranberry and White Chocolate Cookies, which are cookies inspired by my Cranberry Bliss Bars {Starbucks Copycat Recipe}.

I like this dough base for recipes where I want a softer, lighter, more delicate and tender dough, and when white chocolate is involved.

This dough is slightly sweeter and creamier than my trusty chocolate chip cookie dough base. Candy corn would have been fine in that base too, but it really shines in this dough.

The dough is reminiscent of Lofthouse cookie dough, minus the cake flour. It calls for 2 tablespoons of cream or half-and-half which isn’t much, but the milk really tenderizes the dough and it just melt in your mouth.

When I had previously used this base, I hadn’t yet hopped on the cornstarch bandwagon. So this time around I added two teaspoons, like I do with most of my cornstarch cookies. It helps create a softbatch-style cookie that’s so soft and supple, without turning cakey.

I’ve used cornstarch in at least 15 different cookie recipes, including Chocolate Chip and Chunk Cookies, Peanut Butter Coconut Oil Cookies, M&Ms Cookies, Snickers Cookies, Twix Bar Cookies, Caramel Corn Chocolate Chip Cookies, Smores Cookies, Lofthouse Cookies, and more.

I made 20 mounds of dough, each about 2 heaping tablespoons of dough. Because the candy corn and chips are bulky, the raw dough mounds look quite large before being baked, but in the oven and as the dough cooks down around the candy corn and chips, the cookies flatten and turn out to be of average size.

I baked them for just over 9 minutes and they’ll look very pale, glossy, and underdone, but set up dramatically as they cool. Because this dough base is so buttery, baking longer than about 10 minutes could result in the undersides become overly browned.

This is very, very important. Do not allow the candy corn pieces to lay directly on your baking tray and shield the candy with a pinch of dough. Candy corn is prone to burning, melting, and turning into a hot, crispy, lacey mess if baked directly on a hot tray.

The candy corn that’s in the interior of the cookies should not melt or run, provided your dough was chilled before baking.

After baking, it takes on a slightly chewier texture that’s scrumptious.

I had no idea my 6 year old loved candy corn as much as she did until she went nuts over it these cookies. Growing up with more sugar in our house than in many bakeries, she’s usually pretty immune to what I make. Like me, it takes quite a bit to get her excited anymore.

After one of these she said, “Mom, I’m going to be thinking about these cookies all day tomorrow at school.”

I said, “Well sweetie if you want another one now, go for it.”

If I had a 6 year old metabolism, I’d have seconds when fresh cookies were involved.

But she said, “No, I’d rather not so I can dream about them all day tomorrow.”

Candy Corn and White Chocolate Softbatch Cookies An abundance of candy corn and white chocolate chips add texture and an extra pop of sweetness to these softbatch-style cookies. They’re so soft, buttery, tender, and just melt in your mouth. The dough uses both cornstarch and cream, which help keep the cookies supple, light, and extra soft without being cakey. If you’re wondering what to do with all the leftover Halloween candy corn, this recipe will help take it off your hands. Baking this dough longer than about 10 minutes could result in undersides of cookies become overly browned. Strategically place candy corn so that it’s not baking directly on cookie sheet because it will melt, burn, or turn runny if it is. The candy corn pieces need to be in the interior of the cookies, shielded and buffered by dough. Ingredients: 1/2 cup unsalted butter, soften

3/4 cup light brown sugar, packed

1/4 cup granulated sugar

1 large egg

1 tablespoon vanilla extract

2 tablespoons cream or half-and-half

2 cups all-purpose flour

2 teaspoons corn starch

1 teaspoon baking soda

pinch salt, optional and to taste

1 1/2 cups candy corn (1o to 11 ounces)

1 cup white chocolate chips (or salted peanuts) Directions: To the bowl of a stand mixer fitted with the paddle attachment (or large bowl and electric hand mixer), cream together the first 5 ingredients (through vanilla) on medium-high speed until light and fluffy, about 5 minutes. Stop, scrape down the sides of the bowl, and add the next 5 ingredients (through optional salt), and mix on low speed until just incorporated, about 1 minute; don’t overmix. Add the candy corn, white chocolate chips (or peanuts), and mix until just incorporated. Using a medium 2-inch cookie scoop, form heaping two-tablespoon mounds (I made 20). Place mounds on a large plate, flatten mounds slightly, cover with plasticwrap, and refrigerate for at least 3 hours, or up to 5 days, before baking. Do not bake with warm dough because cookies will spread and bake thinner and flatter. Important note – Strategically place candy corn so that it’s not baking directly on cookie sheet because it will melt, burn, or turn runny if it is. The candy corn pieces need to be in the interior of the cookies, shielded and buffered by dough. Preheat oven to 350F, line a baking sheet with a Silpat or spray with cooking spray. Place mounds on baking sheet, spaced at least 2 inches apart (I bake 8 cookies per sheet) and bake for about 9 minutes, or until edges have set and tops are just beginning to set, even if slightly undercooked, pale and glossy in the center. Do not overbake because cookies will firm up as they cool. Baking longer than 10 minutes could result in cookies with overly browned undersides. Allow cookies to cool on the baking sheet for about 5 minutes before transferring to a wire rack to finish cooking. Cookies will keep airtight at room temperature for up to 1 week or in the freezer for up to 4 months. Unbaked cookie dough can be stored airtight in the refrigerator for up to 5 days, or frozen for up to 4 months, so consider baking only as many cookies as desired and save the remaining dough to be baked in the future when desired. Only Eats Recipe from Averie Cooks. All images and content are copyright protected. Please do not use my images without prior permission. If you want to republish this recipe, please re-write the recipe in your own words, or simply link back to this post for the recipe. Thank you.

Related Recipes

Cranberry and White Chocolate Cookies

Maraschino Cherry White Chocolate Cookies

Softbatch Funfetti Sugar Cookies – From scratch, not a mix. So soft, buttery, tender

Lofthouse-Style Soft Peanut Butter Chip Sugar Cookies with Peanut Butter Frosting – Love these and the ones below it. Both are amazing cookies

Reese’s Pieces Peanut Butter Fluffernutter Cookies with Peanut Butter Buttercream – Similar to the cookies below, but chewier and heartier, and the dough has peanut butter, Reese’s Pieces, chocolate chips, and marshmallows before being frosted. Amazing cookies

Reese’s Pieces Soft Peanut Butter Cookies

Sugar-Doodle Vanilla Cookies

White Chocolate Snickerdoodle Cookies

Peanut Butter Oatmeal White Chocolate Chip Cookies – An all-time favorite cookie

Candy Corn Cookie Dough Pretzel Bites (No Bake)

Thanks for the entries in the Oster VERSA Performance Blender Giveaway ($300 Value) + 20 Favorite Blender Recipes



Do you like candy corn?