Their prayers were fueled by a dual hope: that God would take mercy on Jayalalithaa and that Jayalalithaa would take note of their efforts on her behalf. The best way to get her attention was to put on a performance of their own.

Photo

You know you’ve entered Tamil Nadu when you begin to see Jayalalithaa’s face everywhere: a double-chinned Mona Lisa, her long, dark hair pulled back in a demure chignon. In the cities, her party members line the avenues with giant Jayalalithaa billboards to prove their fealty, and her likeness stares out from posters all over the villages, where her biggest vote bank resides. Her face appears on the outside of the free laptops she distributes to students and then again on the desktops. There are Amma pharmacies for subsidized drugs and Amma canteens for 5-rupee meals; soon there will be Amma cinemas for cheap movies. The ubiquity of that face gives the state the feel of a cartoon dictatorship, much to the annoyance of Tamils indifferent to her charms.

Chennai in particular is a city whose self-image is genteel, cultured and intellectual, and some there are prone to deep embarrassment over the excesses of Amma worship. It is also the capital of the Tamil film industry, the southern counterpart to Hindi-language Bollywood in the north. Its blockbusters are just as bombastic, and its fans are even more fervent: at every new release by the Tamil action star Rajinikanth, his admirers bathe posters of him in milk, a treatment typically reserved for idols in temples. But no actor has dominated Tamil culture like M.G.R., who is like a messianic hybrid of Elvis Presley and Ronald Reagan.

In the movies, M.G.R. was a swashbuckler: fencing with the dastardly, rescuing the innocent, dancing, romancing, laughing madly. Jayalalithaa, born in 1948, grew up in his thrall, but wary of the cinema. Her father died when she was 2, and her mother, Sandhya, was a struggling second-rung actress who rarely came home. At 16, Jayalalithaa was confident and voluptuous, a talented dancer with a knowing air. Sandhya’s colleagues found her alluring and offered her parts in movies. Though Jayalalithaa dreamed of becoming a lawyer, her mother pushed her to turn down a college scholarship and accept. One of her first films was ‘‘One in a Thousand,’’ a starring role opposite M.G.R.

When M.G.R. stepped into the studio, everyone was expected to stand in respect. But on the set of ‘‘One in a Thousand,’’ Jayalalithaa sat cross-legged and kept right on reading her book. M.G.R. was intrigued. Despite their three-decade age difference, she turned out to be his perfect on-screen foil: flirty one moment, haughty the next, worldly and earthy and vivacious. Rolling in the grass in a song sequence from the film ‘‘The Sacred Dwelling,’’ he pounces for a kiss, only to end up with a flower in his mouth; she bites the petals from his lips and flings them aside with her teeth. That they were lovers was an open secret, though M.G.R. was married to a former co-star named Janaki. Over the next eight years Jayalalithaa and M.G.R. starred together in 28 films.

By the time they met, M.G.R. was strongly associated with the Dravidian Progress Federation, or D.M.K. The party grew out of a movement against the brutal social order of the era in which lower­ caste Tamils were denied public resources and often forbidden even to wear shoes or ride bicycles. Dravidian activists protested the dominance of Brahmins in Tamil Nadu and of Hindi-speaking northerners on the national level. Fatefully, the D.M.K. came of age just as the cinema craze took hold in India, and many of its ideologues were screenwriters, M.G.R.’s close friend Karunanidhi among them.

The D.M.K. packaged its propaganda in the form of popular action entertainments, using catchy songs to instill Tamil pride, comedy to mock its enemies and extravagant oratory to attract a following, coding its ideas in allegory to evade the censors of the ruling Congress Party. The D.M.K. made M.G.R. a star: his madcap energy gave their films the wild charisma they needed to carry their message. The party cultivated an image of M.G.R. as ‘‘the savior of the poor,’’ the journalist Sampath Kumar told me. ‘‘And he became intoxicated with that image.’’

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

M.G.R. became the face of the party, and what a face it was: jowly in a way that was somehow dashing, with a smile that flitted dangerously between mischief and love. It was a stroke of luck, then, when M.R. Radha, a rival actor, unaccountably shot M.G.R. in the neck just before the 1967 elections, and widespread sympathy for his injury helped push the D.M.K. into power. Two years later, M.G.R. used his party clout to propel Karunanidhi to the chief minister’s chair, a prize for having given him his big break in films.