Delicious, flaky, veggie-packed vegan pot pies in less than 1 hour. That’s all you need to know.

OK, maybe that’s not ALL you need to know. I can’t talk that little – you know that much by now.

These pot pies come just in time for extra-chilly winter days. They’re warm, rich, comforting, entirely vegan and made completely from scratch. I’m so into these right now.

The filling comes together in one pot in about 20 minutes. While it’s simmering away, thickening into liquid gold, make a batch of my Best Damn Vegan Biscuits! Alternatively, top them with pie crust or store bought biscuits. I just like making mine myself because there’s truly nothing better.

You’ll have leftover biscuits but that just means you can have biscuits with breakfast tomorrow. Is that so bad? (answer: no. No, it’s not.)

Total prep time on these guys is about 35 minutes and they bake up in about 15.

I’ve deemed them the “1-hour vegan pot pie” even though they probably require a little less. But with clean up time included that’s probably more accurate. Besides, you’ll be super impressed with yourself when they’re done in 45 minutes and you feel like a pot pie wizard. You’re welcome.

One bite in and I knew these were spot on. They’re:

Warm

Flaky

Savory

Thick & creamy

Loaded with veggies

Topped with the perfect, flaky biscuit

Buttery

Soul-warming

& So satisfying

Your cold winter bones are aching for this dish, I can sense it. Enjoy!

4.9 from 92 reviews 1-Hour Vegan Pot Pies Print Friendly Version Prep time 20 mins Cook time 40 mins Total time 1 hour Easy, 1-hour vegan pot pies loaded with veggies and topped with flaky, from-scratch vegan biscuits! Author: Minimalist Baker Recipe type: Entrée Cuisine: Vegan Serves: 5 Ingredients 3/4 cup chopped yellow onion (~ 1/2 medium onion)

1 large clove garlic, minced

2 cups veggie broth (vegan friendly, such as Orrington farms)

2 cups frozen mixed vegetables (corn, green beans, carrots | or sub fresh)

1/4 cup unsweetened plain almond milk

~1/4 cup unbleached all-purpose flour (or sub other thickener of choice)

2 bay leaves

pinch each sea salt and black pepper

1 batch Best Damn Vegan Biscuits (or sub store-bought, pie crust, or puff pastry) Instructions Preheat oven to 425 degrees F (218 C). Add 2 Tbsp olive oil to a large saucepan over medium heat. Then add onion and garlic and a pinch of salt – stir. Cook until soft – about 7 minutes. Add the flour and stir with a whisk, then slowly whisk in the broth. Add almond milk and bay leaves and stir. Simmer until the mixture is thickened (about 10 minutes). If it still appears too thin, scoop out 1/2 cup of the broth and add 1-2 Tbsp more flour and whisk. Add back into the pot to thicken. Wait a few minutes. Then repeat if necessary. While the sauce is thickening, prepare biscuits (if using). Cut out, leave unbaked, and set aside. Once the sauce is thickened, add the frozen vegetables and cook for 4-5 more minutes. Taste and adjust seasonings, adding more salt and pepper if needed. Discard the bay leaves and divide the mixture evenly between 5-6 lightly greased ramekins or a 8×8 baking dish. Top with vegan biscuits and brush the tops of the biscuits with melted vegan butter. Set your 8×8 dish or ramekins on a baking sheet to catch overflow and bake until the biscuits are golden brown and the filling is bubbly (about 14-17 minutes). Let cool for 5 minutes before serving. If making ahead of time, simply spoon the cooked veggie mixture into your ramekins or dish, top with uncooked biscuits, and freeze. When ready to prepare, preheat oven to 425 degrees (218 C) and cook until the biscuits are golden brown and the mixture is bubbly – roughly 20-30 minutes. Notes *This recipe could easily be adapted to include chicken. Simply add in 1 chicken breast cubed while the sauce is thickening before you add the veggies. Just make sure it’s cooked all the way through before putting in ramekins for baking. Nutrition Information Serving size: 1 pot pie (of 5) Calories: 307 Fat: 12g Saturated fat: 4g Carbohydrates: 41g Sugar: 5.5g Sodium: 1244mg Fiber: 4.7g Protein: 8.3g 3.5.3226