Despite sleep being everywhere - we all do it and we all talk about the amount of hours we caught last night - none of us seem to get enough of the stuff for ourselves. Adults are recommended to sleep for seven to eight hours every night, and yet almost half of us average under six hours, according to a survey carried out by the Sleep Council in 2011.

There are two common complaints that explain this deficit: 1) there simply isn't enough time in the day to get everything done, and 2) that a 'racing mind' at night keeps us awake, biting into our quota of daily shut-eye.

The second of these factors props up an entire industry. Sleep trackers, sleep-improving beds, sleeping pills, clinical sleep diagnostic devices, sleep consultants: in the US alone, it was estimated that $32.4 billion was spent in 2013 on things that help us get some kip.

But before you go splashing the cash, it's worth bearing in mind that there are simple tips and tricks that can help you fall asleep quickly for free.

1. The 4-7-8 technique

Pioneered by Harvard-trained holistic health doctor Andrew Weil, the 4-7-8 technique is as gloriously simple as tricks to make your body fall asleep come.

All you have to do is lightly touch the ridge of tissue behind your top front teeth with your tongue, exhale completely, and then adopt the following breathing pattern:

Breathe in through your nose quietly for a count of 4

Hold your breath for a count of seven

Blow air out through your mouth for a count of 8, making a 'whoosh' sound

Repeat the process three more times

Dr. Weil says the technique is a powerful method of falling asleep because it delivers more oxygen than normal breathing to the parasympathetic nervous system, which becomes overstimulated during times of stress.

Regular counting also helps to distract the mind from the issues of the day that it can carry to bed.

2. Turn off the heating and use a hot water bottle

Ever wake up in the middle of the night feeling cold? You've probably put it down to a drop in temperature outside - but the real reason is often a drop in temperature on the inside. Your inside, to be exact.

Every night, as the body falls asleep and its systems switch to standby, its core temperature drops. Think of it as akin to a car that's been parked up on a driveway after a 100 mile journey.

By preparing a sleep environment that's around the 65 degree mark, you'll help your body's core temperature quickly and naturally reduce, which in turn creates the effect of drowsiness.

And while it may sound counter-intuitive, a hot water bottle can actually help the process. Place the warm rubber container next to your feet. The heat will rapidly dilate blood vessels in your lower limbs, helping the body to redistribute heat from your core to your extremities.