Tackling the problem of food deserts has been embraced by the federal government and many local governments. The federal government’s Healthy Food Financing Initiative has handed out more than $500 million in recent years to help encourage grocery stores to locate in places they had avoided. Many states and cities — like New York — have their own programs, aimed at getting more grocery stores and farmer’s markets into poor neighborhoods where the consumption of fresh fruits and vegetables is low and obesity rates tend to be high.

Photo

Still, all that investment may not pay off in the form of healthier communities. The recent paper looked at the buying habits of families who agreed to allow all of their bar-coded food purchases to be scanned and measured, along with details about their address and demographic characteristics. That data allowed the researchers to track what people bought according to their incomes and education levels, as well as their neighborhoods.

The research, like the work that initially described the food desert concept, noted that lower-income neighborhoods tended to have less healthy food nearby and that their residents tended to eat less healthy diets. The researchers set out to see whether those disparities could be explained by access issues, or by more entrenched preferences for particular kinds of foods.

It turned out that food preferences dominated. When the researchers looked at shoppers with lower levels of income and education living in richer neighborhoods with more accessible healthy food, their shopping mimicked that of low-income, less educated people in poorer neighborhoods. (And the reverse was true, too: Richer, more educated shoppers in poor neighborhoods looked more like rich shoppers in rich neighborhoods.)

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“When we put supermarkets in poor neighborhoods, people are buying the same food,” said Barry Popkin, a professor of Nutrition at the University of North Carolina, who participated in an Institute of Medicine review of food desert research in 2009. “They just get it cheaper.”

New York isn’t the only market where new stores have been built and studied. Research in Philadelphia showed similarly middling effects from the introduction of grocery stores into poor neighborhoods — as have studies of food desert-amelioration policies in England.

It’s possible that poverty itself explains a lot of the shopping variation. In general, fresher, healthier food is more expensive to buy than less healthy processed food. It also takes more time and resources to cook, and keeps for fewer days.

If people can’t afford healthier foods, then it would be reasonable to think that just giving them a better store wouldn’t solve their problems. But Ms. Handbury’s paper found that the education of the shoppers was much more predictive than their incomes. Poorer families bought less healthy food than richer ones. But a bigger gap was found between families with and without a college education. Those results, Ms. Handbury said, suggest that improving people’s diets will require both making food accessible and affordable and also changing people’s perceptions and habits about diet and health.

Mr. Elbel, who studied the grocery store in the Bronx, says the work highlights just how hard it is for public policy to help reduce obesity. The studies aren’t a reason to stop caring about food deserts, he said. But they do tell us that improving access, alone, will not solve the problem. “Nothing is going to show a huge impact for obesity, or almost nothing,” he said. “We can’t always just negate the smaller things.”