A healthy diet is an important part of a healthy lifestyle at any time, but is especially vital if you're pregnant or planning a pregnancy. Eating healthily during pregnancy will help your baby to develop and grow.

This page has information about:

Fruit and vegetables

Starchy foods (carbohydrates)

Protein

Dairy

Foods that are high in sugar or fat

Healthy snacks

Preparing food safely

Healthy Start vouchers

You don't need to go on a special diet, but it's important to eat a variety of different foods every day to get the right balance of nutrients that you and your baby need.

It's best to get vitamins and minerals from the foods you eat, but when you're pregnant you need to take a folic acid supplement as well, to make sure you get everything you need.

Read more about vitamins and supplements in pregnancy.

There are also certain foods that should be avoided in pregnancy.

No need to "eat for two"

You will probably find that you are hungrier than usual, but you don't need to "eat for two" – even if you are expecting twins or triplets.

Try to have a healthy breakfast every day, because this can help you to avoid snacking on foods that are high in fat and sugar.

Eating healthily often means just changing the amounts of different foods you eat so that your diet is varied, rather than cutting out all your favourites. You can use the Eatwell Guide to get the balance of your diet right. It shows you how much of what you eat should come from each food group to achieve a healthy, balanced diet.

You don't need to achieve this balance with every meal, but try to get the balance right over a week.

Fruit and vegetables in pregnancy

Eat plenty of fruit and vegetables because these provide vitamins and minerals, as well as fibre, which helps digestion and can help prevent constipation.

Eat at least five portions of a variety of fruit and vegetables every day – these can be fresh, frozen, canned, dried or juiced. Always wash fresh fruit and vegetables carefully.

Find out what counts as a portion of fruit or vegetables.

Starchy foods (carbohydrates) in pregnancy

Starchy foods are an important source of energy, some vitamins and fibre, and help fill you up without containing too many calories. They include bread, potatoes, breakfast cereals, rice, pasta, noodles, maize, millet, oats, yams and cornmeal. If you are having chips, go for oven chips lower in fat and salt.

These foods should make up just over a third of the food you eat. Instead of refined starchy (white) food, choose wholegrain or higher fibre options such as whole wheat pasta, brown rice or simply leaving the skins on potatoes.

Protein in pregnancy

Eat some protein foods every day. Sources of protein include:

beans

pulses

fish

eggs

meat (but avoid liver)

poultry

nuts

Choose lean meat, remove the skin from poultry, and try not to add extra fat or oil when cooking meat. Read more about eating meat in a healthy way.

Make sure eggs, poultry, burgers, sausages and whole cuts of meat such as lamb, beef and pork are cooked all the way through. Check that there is no pink meat, and that juices have no pink or red in them.

Try to eat two portions of fish a week, one of which should be oily fish such as salmon, sardines or mackerel. Find out about the health benefits of fish and shellfish. There are some types of fish you should avoid. When you're pregnant or planning to get pregnant, you shouldn't eat shark, swordfish or marlin.

When you're pregnant, you should avoid having more than two portions of oily fish a week, such as salmon, trout, mackerel and herring, because it can contain pollutants (toxins).

For more information, see Foods to avoid in pregnancy.

Dairy in pregnancy

Dairy foods such as milk, cheese, fromage frais and yoghurt are important in pregnancy, because they contain calcium and other nutrients that you and your baby need.

Choose low-fat varieties wherever possible, such as semi-skimmed, one per cent fat or skimmed milk, low-fat lower-sugar yoghurt and reduced-fat hard cheese.

If you prefer dairy alternatives, such as soya drinks and yoghurts, go for unsweetened, calcium-fortified versions.

For more information, read about the nutritional benefits of milk and dairy foods.

There are some cheeses you should avoid in pregnancy, including unpasteurised cheeses. To find out which cheeses you shouldn't eat when you're pregnant, see Foods to avoid in pregnancy.

Foods that are high in fat, sugar or both

Sugary foods and drinks are often high in calories which can contribute to weight gain. Having sugary foods and drinks can also lead to tooth decay.

Fat is very high in calories, so eating too many fatty foods or eating them too often can make you put on weight. Having too much saturated fat can increase the amount of cholesterol in the blood, which increases the chance of developing heart disease.

Foods that are high in fat, sugar or both include:

all spreading fats (such as butter)

oils

salad dressings

cream

chocolate

crisps

biscuits

pastries

ice cream

cake

puddings

fizzy drinks

If you're having foods and drinks that are high in fat and sugar, have these less often and in small amounts.

Try to cut down on saturated fat, and have small amounts of foods rich in unsaturated fat instead, such as vegetable oils. Find out about saturated and unsaturated fat.

Healthy snacks in pregnancy

If you get hungry between meals, try not to eat snacks that are high in fat and/or sugar, such as sweets, biscuits, crisps or chocolate. Instead, choose something healthier, such as:

small sandwiches or pitta bread with grated cheese, lean ham, mashed tuna, salmon, or sardines, with salad

salad vegetables, such as carrot, celery or cucumber

low-fat lower-sugar fruit yoghurt, plain yoghurt or fromage frais with fruit

hummus with wholemeal pitta bread or vegetable sticks

ready-to-eat apricots, figs or prunes

vegetable and bean soups

a small bowl of unsweetened breakfast cereal, or porridge, with milk

milky drinks

fresh fruit

baked beans on toast or a small baked potato

a small slice of malt loaf, a fruited tea cake or a slice of toasted fruit bread

Here are some more ideas for healthy food swaps.

When choosing snacks, you can use food labels to help you. Find out more about food labelling, including how the "green, amber, red" code can quickly help you make healthier choices.

Preparing food safely

Wash fruit, vegetables and salads to remove all traces of soil, which may contain toxoplasma, a parasite that can cause toxoplasmosis – which can harm your unborn baby.

Wash all surfaces and utensils, and your hands, after preparing raw foods (poultry, meat, eggs, fish, shellfish and raw vegetables) – this will help to avoid food poisoning.

Make sure that raw foods are stored separately from ready-to-eat foods, otherwise there's a risk of contamination.

Use a separate knife and chopping board for raw meats.

Heat ready meals until they're steaming hot all the way through – this is especially important for meals containing poultry.

You also need to make sure that some foods, such as eggs, poultry, burgers, sausages and whole cuts of meat like lamb, beef and pork are cooked very thoroughly. For tips, read Foods to avoid in pregnancy.

Healthy Start vouchers for pregnant women

You may qualify for the Healthy Start scheme, which provides vouchers to pregnant women and families who qualify. The vouchers can be used to buy milk and plain fresh and frozen vegetables at local shops. You'll also get coupons that can be exchanged for free vitamins locally.

For more information or to apply for the vouchers, you can:

go to Do I qualify for Healthy Start vouchers?

download a Healthy Start application form, or

call the Healthy Start helpline on 0345 607 6823

You can also find out where to get Healthy Start vitamins near you or general maternity services near you.

Read about exercise in pregnancy.