Australian outdrove Sebastian Vettel when they were team-mates at Red Bull. Now he just wants to be competitive

“That lucky bugger,” is how Daniel Ricciardo describes his former Red Bull team-mate Sebastian Vettel but the usual chasm-wide grin belies any malice. It is a light-hearted riposte to a serious predicament that sees the Australian, in his fourth season with the team, again unable to challenge for the Formula One world championship while Vettel, who won four titles for Red Bull, is once more at the sharp end of the fight with a resurgent Ferrari.

Ricciardo’s upbeat attitude is more than just that of a typically good-humoured Aussie. He has learned to deal with disappointment and emerge the better man for it.

The Italian Grand Prix should prove another tough task for Red Bull, with their cars struggling on the power-hungry straights of Monza. But if they do finally give him a ride to challenge with, which he believes they will next year, Ricciardo will relish it all the more.

When Vettel won his first title in 2010 Ricciardo drove the Red Bull in the end-of-season young driver test in Abu Dhabi. His form would have been noted by the new champion. The track at Yas Marina had improved by about 1.5 seconds since the season decider but Ricciardo’s time was still 1.3sec quicker than Vettel’s qualifying time.

He was in a Toro Rosso by midway through the next season and stayed there while Vettel won his next three titles, before being promoted to the dominant senior squad in 2014. He had every reason to smile but what followed was a shock to the system as Mercedes ran away with the turbo-hybrid era. Ricciardo has not been in a battle for the title since.

“In the second half of 2013 Sebastian had more wins than we have had as a team since then,” he says. “I came into the team thinking this is the best car on the grid so that was one little frustration I had to deal with.”

Vettel on thin ice after Hamilton run-in while Ricciardo restores Red Bull fizz | Giles Richards Read more

The 28-year-old is not exaggerating. Vettel won the last nine races in 2013. Red Bull have won six since – five by Ricciardo and one by his team-mate Max Verstappen. That he could challenge with the right machinery was clear from his debut season with Red Bull. He outdrove Vettel, who would leave for Ferrari at the end of the year. Ricciardo won three, Vettel none and he out-qualified the world champion by 12 to seven.

Unfortunately the car dropped even further off the pace the following year and they finished fourth in the constructors’ championship. It was a low point from which Ricciardo came to terms with there being more to F1 than turning in some fast laps.

“I learned from 2015,” he says in Monza. “I had built up that that was going to be a championship year. I thought we had the tools to do it but we didn’t. I held on to it for quite a while and became a more frustrated, unhappy person. I wasn’t my typical self often enough.

“I changed my perspective. I am frustrated that we are not in a championship fight but if I hold on to the frustration it is not going to make me perform better. I have years left ahead of me, I have to be smart in how I deal with it.”

He has proved he has speed and formidable racecraft. The Red Bull was once again slow to start this season but Ricciardo has wrung six podiums from it, including one win in Baku and third at the last round in Belgium. He has learned to embrace every moment, despite not being where he wants to be.

“I milked every minute of that podium,” he says of the fun he was having orchestrating the crowd at Spa. “I am loving the podiums because we know we don’t have the car to be there. But I see Seb and Lewis up there all the time and obviously I want to be that guy.”

He admits that not competing with the two title contenders remains hard to take. “There is some frustration,” he says. “I look at Seb or Lewis and think: ‘If only I had your car.’ I acknowledge they are at the top of their game but I feel I could be there as well.”

Lewis Hamilton wins Belgian Grand Prix to narrow gap in F1 title race Read more

His contract with Red Bull concludes at the end of next season and, while he insists he is not thinking about where he will be in 2019, he does concede that the team must build a more competitive car. He still believes it can be done and that, when his chance comes, putting in the hard yards these past four years will have proved worthwhile and he might even have earned some luck.

“I have gone past the days of it being demotivating, I can see the bigger picture,” he says. “Everything you can learn from is an opportunity to become stronger. The day I do get a championship winning car I will run with it. I will capitalise on every part of that beautiful thing.”

At Monza on Sunday the gap to the front remains and the Australian will be starting on the back foot with a 20-place grid penalty after Red Bull opted to change engine components. Lewis Hamilton topped the time sheets in first practice and he was second to his team-mate Valtteri Bottas in the afternoon session, with Vettel in third only just over a tenth in arrears. However both the Red Bulls were a second off the pace over the two runs.

Hamilton trails Vettel by seven points in the title fight and is looking to ensure he makes no repeat of last year’s race when he was dominant in qualifying only to have a poor start and for Nico Rosberg to take the win. He will want to take the overall record of F1 pole positions from Michael Schumacher with his 69th but knows Sunday is what really matters.

“The race is the most important part of the weekend,” Hamilton said. “This weekend the ultimate goal is to win, to put a dent in the lead Vettel has had all season. He’s had that smile on his face all year long because he’s had that lead, so I’m looking forward to turning that upside down.”

Vettel, who took his debut win here in 2008 for Toro Rosso, will be hoping the tifosi can spur him on to spoil Hamilton’s plans – the Scuderia are celebrating the 70th anniversary of the manufacture of their first Ferrari-badged car this weekend.