Casper was born at home, twelve years ago. During labor, I crawled back and forth across the floor on my hands and knees. If I moved fast enough, I might dodge the steel-toed kick of the contractions against my cervix. Some small relief came from leaning out of a window into the cool night air; I would bellow, walrus-like, much to the surprise of the pedestrians below, before hands pulled me back inside. When he crowned, I remember placing my fingers on the wet fur of Casper’s head, and saying, “I love you, baby,” to his half-submerged form. A photograph shows his upside-down head, white with vernix, and with a single teardrop of blood rolling down one cheek, sticking out from between my legs.

The decade prior had been spent travelling across America in search of subjects to photograph. I had built my work and my life on the road, and, now that I was a mother, I had no idea how to continue living as an artist. But I figured things would work out somehow, if I could just get us out there. I equipped my van with all the props of domesticity, and we split. Later, when Casper could talk, he dubbed the van the “Mama Car.”

We crossed the country many, many times. Our migrations followed the weather, so that the barefoot pleasures of summer could extend as long as possible into the winter months. We climbed rocks in the desert and trees in the forest, built forts out of sticks, and spiced our mud pies with pine needles. A bump in the road would jostle an assortment of glass jars, spilling insect specimens onto the floor of the van. The next day, we would wake up with ladybugs in our hair; I discovered that they bite. Casper thought it was normal—thought other mamas loaded sheet film at McDonald’s, other kids stacked rocks while their parents composed scenes. On waking from a nap in his car seat, he might ask me, “Where are we, Mama? Are we shopping for views?” Or, pointing out a van along the way, he would inquire, “Who lives in that Mama Car?” Often, people thought we were homeless and offered us food or money. Other parents would pull their children away from us in playgrounds: “Suzy,” they would say, “come play over here.”

The road cemented our togetherness, at times in brutal ways. Casper was the constant focus of my attention, and I struggled to find space in which to work. When I did, my photography felt peripheral to my parenting. The luxury of overthinking my process gave way to the necessity of working fast, on the fly, making the best of what was at hand. I learned to trust in chance accidents, which were in no short supply. Casper changed not only how I photographed but what I photographed; his being permeated everything I did. And yet it was as if each picture took me away from him, and he was forever pulling me back. I remember complaining to him once, “Jeff Wall doesn’t have to make peanut butter and jelly sandwiches in the middle of his photo shoots!” And he, age four, replying, “Oh yeah? What else does Jeff Wall not have to do?”

The photographs I took of Casper didn’t express the sentiments of a doting mother, despite the intensity of the love I felt for him. They were compromises—shots taken when he fell asleep in the car, or couldn’t be convinced to leave the campground, or when holding his squirming body prevented me from finding other people to photograph. Often, the pictures I took of him seemed to be tinged with resentment: Was this the best I could manage? At other times he would simply refuse to be photographed—standing still for a large-format camera can be a tedious task. I would beg or bribe him for photographs; his permission, when given, came grudgingly. A favorite tactic was to place his hand in front of his face, but he later invented more subtle forms of protest, folding his body inward, with his hair in front of his face. Once, while waiting for a train that never came, Casper broke away from me. He ran into the tall grass of the industrial wilderness that lined the tracks, and yelled back to me, “I don’t need you; I don’t need anybody!”

My decision, in 2010, to get off the road and enroll Casper at school was made for many reasons, not the least of which was the recognition that my supposed freedom was impinging on his independence. Where he had once wanted nothing more than to have me to himself, he was now beginning to outgrow life in the van. Driving down the highway on one of our last trips together, I tallied up the pros and cons for the millionth time, trying to decide if it was worth it—the toll on Casper, his father, and me—in order to continue to make my work. Thinking out loud, I said, “I don’t know why I do it; I don’t know why I’m a photographer.” Casper, now age six, responded, “Mama, you’re a photographer so you can go on road trips.” As if to say, “I forgive you.”

Of the four months of the year I now spend on the road, Casper travels with me for two. The other two, somewhat desperate childfree months—January and June—are hard to claim for myself, torn as I am between the roles of selfless parent and narcissistic artist, to the point where I feel like a narcissistic parent and _ _an artist without a self. I know Casper is fine when I leave—he’s with his father, after all—but still I return anxious, loaded down with unnecessary gifts, swooping back as if to rescue him. The partially reclaimed independence of driving slowly west alone has caused my work to shift again. Now the pictures I take focus literally on the stuff of the road: the cracked cement, the greasy underbellies of automobiles—the car as both symbol and fact in the American landscape. It occurs to me that all of these pictures could be taken ten miles from where I live. And yet I continue to crisscross the country.

The photographs and text in this post were drawn from “Highway Kind,” by Justine Kurland, which is out October 31st from Aperture. A version of this essay first appeared in Hobo magazine.