I love the idea of living a more minimally minded lifestyle. And it would seem that many others have been gravitating toward that decor philosophy, as well. But one of my biggest concerns — and a fear I've heard echoed by others — is that moving one's home toward a more minimal look might also leave it cold, characterless and uninviting.

Irene and Rob Burg's house in the Netherlands was built in 1934. And while they've done a beautiful job of respecting many of the home's architectural features, the design-forward couple has also managed to infuse the space with a lot of minimal, modern design. I wouldn't call them minimalists, but some of their rooms are definitely minimalist-friendly, among them the master bedroom and guest room.

Both rooms aren't filled to the brim with "things." A bed, some art, some bedding and a few accessories. But yet, both rooms feel cozy, inviting and appealing. Even with all the white in the spaces — from white walls to white ceilings to white floors — the rooms don't feel cold or empty. And though these bedrooms might have more stuff in them than you might prefer if you're a strict minimalist, they hold the secret to creating streamlined spaces that feel warm and welcoming: Texture, texture and texture!

At each opportunity to add in an item in these bedrooms, the couple chose something with intense texture. The light fixture in the guest bedroom? A dramatic woven basket hanging pendant. Instead of art or a headboard, they hung an over-sized tapestry on the wall. The bedding features sumptuous materials. Even the planter at the foot of the bed has a rough, visible surface texture.

In the master bedroom, the same ideas were used. Soft, luxurious bedding that begs to be touched. A bold hanging tapestry instead of art above the bed. A colorful and natural fiber woven basket hangs from the corner of a large standing mirror.

But the master bedroom also exemplifies the idea that texture doesn't always need to come in the form of a textile; the intricately punched metal Moroccan hanging light fixture gives the room texture. Even something as seemingly small as a peacock feather adds visual texture to this room.

See this whole home → A Long-Time Love Affair with a 1930s Dutch Home

Minimal and Modern Homes: