Bacon’s assistant evaporated out the door as her boss set a plate on the kitchen counter: strawberry-rose-geranium bars, tiny “doughnuts” made with mushroom and quinoa and a cinnamon bun that looked as if it were forged by a chic cave man with primitive tools. All of it was vegan, organic and raw. She poured coffee from a yellow enamel pot and slid onto a stool beside me, curling her bare feet up and arraying gauzy cottons around her. Sunshine glowed through the layers. She was, I was quickly realizing, the kind of woman who always seems backlit.

“There’s a lot of Power Dust in that,” she said, pointing to the coffee. Power Dust, like Brain Dust, is a formula of stevia-sweetened powdered herbs that Moon Juice sells in an attractive jar. I would describe the taste as “soil-forward.”

“Is it possible to overdose on Dust?” I asked. “I had two doses this morning, and I also had two last night.” In an effort to test the products, I’d been guinea-pigging. So far, any effects were undetectable.

“No,” Bacon said. “You’re good. You’re safe. I mean, is it possible to overdose? You’d probably have severe physical symptoms first.”

As a housekeeper vacuumed nearby, Bacon kicked into her origin story. Growing up in New York City, she was a sickly child (“bronchial stuff”) whose parents took her to doctors (“I got pumped through the Western-medicine chain”) without satisfactory results (“Of course nothing helped”). One day she went shopping with her family at a downtown health-food store, where, the story goes, an Ayurvedic doctor visiting from India overheard Bacon coughing. The doctor came over and posed some questions (“Very typical Ayurvedic ones, like ‘How often do you poop?’ ”) and took the child’s pulse. After examining Bacon’s tongue, the man provided her mother with a list of forbidden foods: cow’s milk, wheat and white sugar, among others. Bacon stopped eating gluten at age 4 and became a vegetarian at around 7.

She is aware that these biographical details invite ridicule, but Bacon doesn’t care if people make fun of her. She’s used to it. And anyway, hers was a challenging childhood: “I was told growing up that I had learning disabilities and mental illness. That was all the rage in the ’90s.” She reflected on her past calmly. “I came from a family that was like: ‘Yes. Whatever the doctor says is right. Just take the pills.’ ” (Bacon’s mother was the C.E.O. of the fashion company Betsey Johnson, and her father was a musician.)

At 18, Bacon moved to Italy alone. Why Italy? “If I thought about all the times I felt connected or alive, it was around the rituals of people gathering and eating and sharing food and slowing down,” she said. In Florence, Bacon discovered that food was her calling. After several years of traveling, she wound up at a culinary school in Vermont. Following graduation, she emailed the Los Angeles-based chef and restaurateur Suzanne Goin and asked for a job. Goin emailed back with an invitation to meet. Bacon hopped on a plane and moved into a garage three blocks from one of Goin’s restaurants, where she hand-whisked aioli and pounded salsa verde with a mortar and pestle until her biceps ached. In early 2012, having absorbed lessons of entrepreneurship from Goin, she opened the first store. “It really is not my name,” she explained, when I asked where the phrase Moon Juice came from. “It just dropped down from the universe.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Along with cucumber-pineapple-jalapeño juice and almond milk, the first Moon Juice sold organic bananas with walnut butter and cacao cashew snack bites. In 2014, Shailene Woodley was photographed carrying a Moon Juice tote bag. Zoë Kravitz called it her favorite juice bar. Bacon appeared on Goop to make “spirit truffles” and “sex bark” with Paltrow in 2015. New Moon Juice locations opened in Silver Lake and on Melrose Place.

Bacon turned her focus inward, toward marketing the herbal remedies she’d been incorporating into her diet for years. In 2014, the company added the line of jarred herb powders that now includes Spirit Dust, Beauty Dust, Power Dust, Brain Dust, Dream Dust and Sex Dust. The formulas sampled Ayurvedic and Chinese medicine; the labels instructed users to mix a teaspoon with hot or cold liquid (“Don’t be afraid to double dose!”). The Dusts proved to be what a venture capitalist might call an “inflection point”: unlike raw juices, they were easy to package and ship, had a long shelf life and faced zero competition from the likes of Coca-Cola (which, for example, has invested mightily in juice, including a $90 million stake in a company called Suja Life). They could be marketed as a beauty supplement and sold in stores like Saks Fifth Avenue. The Dusts were scalable.

And Bacon insists they work. “People really report back: Wow, my skin changed,’ ” she said, turbocharging into evangelical mode. “I hear incredible stories from people. There was a young, beautiful woman who approached me at an event. She said, ‘I’ve been coming into Moon Juice, I had breast cancer,’ and she went through all that hormonal treatment, and by going through it, she no longer had a sex drive. She’s beautiful! She’s our age. She has a boyfriend ... and she said that the Sex Dust” — along with pomegranate seed lube — “got them to be able to enjoy sex despite the fact that her body wasn’t producing any of the hormones enabling her to do so. So the herbs, they work. They all work.” You can now buy them at Urban Outfitters, the Ace Hotel and Net-a-Porter.

While she spoke, Bacon finger-combed her hair, pausing now and then to stare critically at the ends. Incense curled out the window in velvety puffs. When I finished eating the pastries, she unfurled herself from her stool and brought out a second course: cloudlike coconut yogurt sprinkled with bee pollen in a pearlescent stone bowl. Fairy food.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Magazine Newsletter Get the best of the Magazine delivered to your inbox every week, including exclusive feature stories, photography, columns and more. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

The housekeeper paused near Bacon holding a wispy white garment. “Sucio o limpio?” she asked.

“Sucio,” Bacon said with a smile. The gentle sound of laundry in progress emerged from around a corner.

By the time I left Bacon’s house, I wanted to scrub off my makeup and swaddle myself in white cottons and let my hair tumble down my back in sun-lightened coils like hers. I wanted to move to California and eat bee pollen, even though I think bee pollen tastes like the reptile section at the zoo and California is the state where I was born and spent 18 years plotting my escape from, and it can’t be denied that I benefit strongly from makeup. But all of that was wiped away within minutes of meeting this woman, whose ability to perform every action with charisma — whether pouring coconut milk into a pot or requesting a strategy meeting with her staff — seemed a direct result of her dietary choices. I understand that Bacon’s success is a product of ambition, luck, privilege and stamina. So why did I covertly order a 16-ounce sack of bee pollen from Amazon on my phone during a three-minute break in our conversation? The answer is obvious: Bacon is a lifestyle guru, and this is what lifestyle gurus do. They insist on a connection between what you buy and who you are. And then they sell you stuff. If they are Bacon, they also pronounce the word guru “goo-doo,” in what I can only assume is the authentic manner.

The Melrose location of Moon Juice is right down the street from the Marc Jacobs and Alexander McQueen stores. “Welcome to the Moon Kingdom of Edible Alchemy,” it says on the wall. “Thrive Cosmically!” The space is sun-soaked, flower-filled and incalculably expensive. I mean this literally: I was unable to calculate, standing at the register, how crackers and a bottle of juice could total $15. I felt that if I took away the crackers, I might still be charged $15, and that if I added a coconut yogurt, the total might leap to $50. The saleswoman who rang me up approved of my drink choice (Golden Tonic with Moon Dust). “This one is — ” She shook her head, wordless. “You can feel the medicine working in you.” Like Bacon, she wore head-to-toe white, with billowing culottes. I went outside with my juice and sat at a table, watching the saleswoman straighten bottles of Enzymatic Tonic and Gracious Greens.

An employee poked her head out the door, holding a phone. “Hey! Are you Milky?” she asked.

“Molly.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Ha, ha, autocorrect.” She glanced down at her phone. “Amanda’s running just a few minutes late — she’ll be here soon.”

I sipped my Moon-Dusted recovery nectar and gnawed a packet of fermented seed crisps. They smelled like tree bark. Here, about a dozen miles from Bacon’s home, the only sound was of lawns being mowed. This lightly accessorized silence is the sonic backdrop of L.A.’s expensive neighborhoods. Women with Goyard and Mansur Gavriel bags slid in and out of the shop. I eavesdropped on three customers arguing about whether a peanut was a fruit, a vegetable or a seed.

Around 11 a.m., Bacon arrived in white denim overalls and Céline sunglasses to test formulas with the company’s in-house herbalist, Blaire Edwards. Before the tasting, she darted around the store, repositioning a cluster of skin products and switching the electricity back on when it unexpectedly shut off. From a back room, Edwards fetched tasting supplies and set them up on a table outside the store. The table was within inches of customers, and Bacon voted to drag it 10 feet away, beyond earshot. “I feel like customers enjoying our current formulas don’t need to hear about the new formulas,” she said. “It could cause anxiety.” At the relocated table, Edwards set out baggies of brown powders labeled in Sharpie marker. She mixed a powder into a cup of water and handed it to her boss.

“Is that three grams?” Bacon asked.

“Yes, madame,” Edwards replied.

Bacon sipped the brown liquid thoughtfully. “I like it,” she said. “My only thought is, less stevia.” She passed the cup to me. “You’re about to get really high.” I swallowed the potion. It was like mild Ovaltine mixed with floor sweepings. When frothed with chai tea, coconut milk and ghee in one of the store’s $6 lattes, it would be scrumptious.

“These are literally ancient herbs,” Edwards said. “This isn’t something Amanda made up out of thin air.” She mixed another sample in a cup while Bacon took calls, greeted fans, sniffed samples and arranged a conversation with a vendor. She possesses a curious quality I’ve seen in other executives: a tendency toward extreme distraction coupled with the ability to laser in on a single task. She is either doing a million things or one thing, but never any number of things in between.

This quality of scattered orchestration is illustrated in “The Moon Juice Cookbook,” which opens its first chapter with a photograph of Bacon kneeling on a shaggy rug strewn with rosebuds and raw almonds. She is surrounded by crystals, a conch shell, an avocado, a flowering shrub, a string of beads and a sculpted owl. Her head is bowed in what looks like reverence. In her hands is an upside-down bundle of calla lilies. The photograph has been styled minutely, but it is hard to extract meaning from the picture. The filmy white garb, the glistening avocado, the melting calla lilies — all arrayed in Edenic plenitude — add up to an alluring, sensory glamour. When you sprinkle Beauty Dust on your almond-milk latte, this is what you are summoning.

Or you might be summoning exactly the opposite. We tend to think of “wellness” as the province of swoony liberal elites, but it does, in fact, blossom at both cultural poles. The far-right conspiracy theorist and radio host Alex Jones sells some of the same supplements as Moon Juice on his Infowars website. Jones’s organic fair-trade coffee can be purchased in an “Immune Support” variety that includes cordyceps and reishi mushroom extracts; Moon Juice sells cordyceps and reishi powders with similar claims attached. The “Super Female Vitality” supplement at the Infowars shop shares a number of ingredients with the Moon Juice Dusts: maca, epimedium, shilajit. Alex Jones and Amanda Chantal Bacon each sell probiotics. They each warn against the encroachment of “toxins.” Bacon has a recipe for strawberry milk with drops of colloidal silver in it; Alex Jones pushes tiny bottles of colloidal silver online for $19.95. Perhaps the biggest difference between the two purveyors is context. Alex Jones sells his merchandise alongside tactical body armor and Trump shirts; Bacon sells hers next to chia pudding.

What unifies the two is the subtext of their pitches — a seeming conviction that widespread forces are acting on benighted consumers, who can thwart harm only by venturing to the fringes and buying non-F.D.A. approved supplements with which to purify themselves. For Jones, the treachery comes in the form of fluoridated water and chemtrails. For Bacon, it’s Western medicine and the standard American diet. One brand is designed to look like an ashram and the other to look like an underground bunker, but you walk away from each with the same conclusion — that the only way out is way, way, out, in a land of mystical mushrooms and miracle herbs. The valor of separatism, after all, is our founding myth.

No place on earth is better suited to nurturing this mass turning-inward than Los Angeles. After I interviewed Bacon at her house the day before, I put my shoes back on and walked downhill toward the ocean, past sage clusters and foamy crests of bougainvillea and signs for a lost cat named India. Dry-cleaning vans made deliveries. Gardeners edged lawns. I passed the most expensive-looking mailbox I’d ever seen, and more varieties of security fence than you could possibly imagine, and houses that looked like every decade’s concept of the future. I was full to the brim of cleansing foods, strolling down a winding road past $6 million homes, each one an island. My sack of bee pollen would arrive in two to four business days.