The Four Vortexes

Finding the Strongest Energy. Juniper trees respond to the vortex energy in a physical way that reveals where this energy is strongest. The stronger the energy, the more of an axial twist the Juniper trees have in their branches. Instead of going straight down the branch, the lines of growth follow a slow helical spiral along the length of the branch. This spiraling effect can sometimes even bend the branch itself.



Twisted Juniper Branch

Entrance to Boynton Canyon Vortex located at small knoll

Strong vortex energy all around Bell Rock

Bell Rock

Cathedral Rock Vortex on the creek next to Cathedral Rock

Airport Vortex The vortex is located behind the

saddle in the rocks near Airport Road

Bell Rock Vortex. Bell Rock is located on Hwy 179, just north of the Village of Oak Creek (5 miles south of the junction of Hwy 89A and 179). Its distinct shape makes it easy to spot, and parking and trails are clearly visible. You will notice that the energy is strong as soon as you get out of your car. You don't have to do any climbing to feel the energy at this vortex. Notice the twisted Juniper trees all over Bell Rock. The energy at this vortex is very powerful and strengthens all three parts: the masculine side, the feminine side, and the balance.

Boynton Canyon Vortex. From the junction of Hwys. 179 and 89A, drive 3.2 miles west on 89A and turn right on Dry Creek Rd. Follow the signs for Boynton Canyon (this takes you along Dry Creek Road 2.9 miles to a "T" intersection where you turn left, then another 1.7 miles to another "T" where you turn right, then 0.1 mile to a parking area on the right). If you end up at the entrance to Enchantment Resort, turn around and go back 0.3 mile to the parking area. From the parking area, enter Boynton Canyon Trail. Go 250 yards, then take the left fork to stay on Boynton Canyon Trail. Go another 400 yards to the Vista Trail sign. Take the right fork and follow the Vista Trail up the hill. Follow the cairns (red rock trail markers in wire barrels) along this trail, and soon you arrive at a 30 foot high knoll. The energy is strongest around this knoll. Notice the very twisted Juniper trees all around this trail. The energy at this vortex strengthens the masculine/feminine or yin/yang balance. The Balance between the masculine and feminine side is almost as important as growth itself. Even a less evolved person, if he is balanced, at least treats others the same way he treats himself. And that is what balance is all about. If the masculine side strongly outweighs the feminine, you are too strong for the amount of goodness you have, and you tend to do harm to others because you can be pushy and take unfair advantage of others. On the other hand, if the feminine side greatly outweighs the masculine, you have more goodness than strength, and you tend to let others push you around and take advantage of you. Emotions are a good indication of this balance. If you feel anger more easily than fear, your masculine side is stronger, and if the opposite is true, your feminine side is stronger. Having a good masculine/feminine balance also helps relationships by strengthening the things that make relationships work well, such as intimacy, commitment, honesty and openness. More information on The Masculine/Feminine Balance.

Red Rock Crossing/Cathedral Rock Vortex. The easiest access to this vortex, driving only on paved road, is to drive 4.3 miles west on 89A from the junction of Hwys 89A and 179, and turn left on Upper Red Rock Loop Rd. Then go 1.8 miles and turn left on Chavez Ranch Rd. Follow the pavement .8 mile and turn left into Crescent Moon Park (fee to enter). Drive as far into the park as possible, then walk to the creek. As you walk east along the creek toward Cathedral Rock, you will feel the energy getting stronger. The strongest energy is where the creek is closest to Cathedral Rock. At this point, the spires of Cathedral Rock are hidden behind the cliffs on the other side of the creek. The energy at this vortex strengthens the feminine side. This vortex can also be approached from the Village of Oak Creek by driving along Verde Valley School Road to the end, and then walking along the other side of Oak Creek. Also, if you enjoy hiking and climbing, there is a third route that will bring you close enough to this vortex to feel its energy: From Hwy 179, drive in Back-o-Beyond Rd .6 mile to the parking area at the base of Cathedral Rock, and then hike up the creek bed toward the center of Cathedral Rock. The Feminine Side can be viewed as being on a scale that has goodness at the high end, and the opposite, which is badness or evil, at the low end. In contrast to the masculine side, which strengthens the ability to stand up for your own rights, the feminine side strengthens the ability to allow others their rights and not interfere with those rights. The energy at this vortex strengthens the things you normally think of as feminine, such as kindness, compassion, patience, and the ability to let others need you and depend on you. And it strengthens the ability to anticipate the impact of your actions before you act, which is what considerateness is all about. More information on The Feminine Side.

Airport Vortex. From the junction of Hwys 179 and 89A, go 1.1 mile west on 89A and turn left on Airport Rd. Go .5 mile up Airport Rd. to the parking area on the left. Walk up the trail to the saddle between the hills, where the Juniper trees are very twisted. You may also want to walk up to the top of the small hill on the left. From this vantage point you can see most of Sedona. The energy at this vortex strengthens the masculine side. The Masculine Side can be seen as being on a scale that has strength at the high end and weakness at the low end. People who have a strong masculine side are self-confident. They have the internal strength to take charge of their own lives, and to claim their rights in life. This make them good at standing up to people who try to take away their rights by force, intimidation or manipulation. Having a strong masculine side means being good at taking risks when appropriate, being decisive when necessary, and being able to focus or concentrate in order to get things done. It also means being good at figuring out how to get out of life what is desired; figuring out how to operate responsibly, and how to reason without distorting reality. Conversely, people who have a weak masculine side often doubt their abilities, and many things intimidate them. More information on The Masculine Side.

A twisted juniper tree

There are several energy centers, or vortexes of subtle energy, located in the Sedona area. (In Sedona, the energy centers are referred to as vortexes rather than vortices.) The energy from these vortexes saturates the whole area in and around Sedona, and can be noticed in a subtle but general way anywhere around town. If you actually go to one of the vortex sites, which is where the energy is strongest, it can be a very uplifting experience. The energy you take in at one of these energy centers can stay with you and affect you positively for days afterwards.

The Energy of Sedona In addition to being a beautiful and serene place, Sedona has long been known as a spiritual power center. This is because the power that emanates from the vortexes produces some of the most remarkable energy on the planet. This energy is the reason Sedona is full of people that are "on the path", that is, people who have made a commitment to grow and become as much as they can spiritually. It is also the reason that such a large New Age community has sprung up in the Sedona area, bringing with it a variety of spiritual practices and alternative healing modalities, and it is the reason Sedona has sometimes been called a spiritual Disneyland. We have personally found the energy centers at Sedona both exciting and growth inspiring. If you are at all sensitive to the more subtle things, the experience of standing at one of these vortexes, and letting the energy flow into you and through you, can be almost overwhelming. People come from all over the world to experience this.

