In 1978, Waylon Jennings and Willie Nelson sang their classic country cover warning mothers to not let their children become cowboys because of the tough and busy life of cowboy culture.

Today, this admonition from parents is more common for those wanting to become physicians. In a recent survey, nine out of ten physicians were unwilling to recommend healthcare as a profession. In 2014, the American Medical Association found that 47% of practicing physicians reported high emotional exhaustion, 35% saw less value in their work and 41% were satisfied (not happy, but satisfied) with their work-life balance. The survey went on to identify the three problem areas:

Loss of autonomy (75% now are in hospital-owned practices)

Loss of autonomy (75% now are in hospital-owned practices) Mental exhaustion (listing heavy workloads and increased clerical work, due to cumbersome electronic medical records)

Mental exhaustion (listing heavy workloads and increased clerical work, due to cumbersome electronic medical records) Asymmetrical rewards (success is expected, but mistakes come with heavy punishments)

And then there is the stress, as suggested by that asymmetrical rewards issue. When I was in medical school, an attending’s patient had a cardiac arrest and was in the last stages of a failing resuscitation. As a medical student, I was told to give a bolus of a drug during this “code” while he instructed others to shock the heart for what must have been the 15th time, in an attempt to stop incessant ventricular fibrillation. Instead of giving the medicine slowly, I injected it over a matter of seconds. “You just killed my patient,” he yelled at me. As a naïve med student, I thought I had. I was devastated for days until a more mature resident pointed out that the attending was just taking out his frustration on me. In business school you may have pressure but not like that.

To become a specialty physician, it typically requires 4 years of college, 4 of medical school, 3-5 of internship/residency and 3-5 of fellowship, thus 7-14 years after college! And that doesn’t even account for time potentially spent in other education, work, childbirth or childcare. Thus, the typical physician finally enters the workforce close to age 40. Now, for comparison, a college graduate looking at alternative professions can graduate from law school or business school (MBA) with three years of training and begin gainful employment by their mid- to late-20s.

Watch On Forbes: Improving Cancer Care With Big Data

Medical students pay a huge tuition for those four years (average $278,000 for private med schools, $208,000 for public schools), on top of prior college expenses and thus leave with an average debt of over $180,000, less only because many get help from their parents. When I graduated from med school in 1975, the average debt was $13,000 (adjusted for inflation, that would be $57,000 in today’s dollars, not $180,000). Today, the post-medical-school years (internship, residency and fellowship) typically pay these doctors still in training about $60,000 a year for 3-8 years. Don’t forget that the average post-graduate physician works 80 hours a week, so that translates to around $14 an hour! Thus, when you factor in the interest on the debt as well as the lost income, by their late-30s, doctors are about $500,000 (yes, a half a million dollars) behind a college graduate entering other professions. Even former Fed Chairman Ben Bernanke’s son graduated from med school with a $400,000 debt.

Of course, there are still plenty of applicants to medical school these days. However, some of those are leaving without doing a residency, particularly those that live in med tech areas like Boston and the San Francisco Bay Area. Last year, nearly 60% of Stanford Medical school graduates said they plan to go into a business, research or consulting role rather than practice medicine. Those that go into clinical medicine are increasingly choosing areas where the lifestyle is more manageable with distinct shifts and no call, like emergency medicine or hospital medicine. The “entitlement generation” may actually have it right; often they will choose a specialty where their hours are limited, avoiding the greater stress and on-call responsibilities necessary in other medical specialties. However, as my generation retires, who will be there when we get sick?