There are many theories about why doctors kill themselves with such frequency. It is often suggested it is about our access to lethal means, although to me this does not ring true because it implies the act is controlled and clinical. This is not true of many of the doctor suicides I know about, which were brutal.

To really understand the suicide problem, we need to consider the issue more broadly and question the simmering distress and burnout among doctors in the early years of their careers. This is particularly of interest to me now that, in my second year of practice as a doctor, I am working in mental health. Suicide is my day job.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

With my doctor colleagues in a variety of fields, we are starting to talk about the trauma we face, which we must remind ourselves can be real trauma. Rape threats from patients. The ethical problem of knowing we are getting illegal migrants just well enough for the government to deport them. Having to decide whether to forcibly sedate a teenager who is threatening to smash up the emergency department or to watch and wait, knowing full well that what we are watching and waiting for is a nurse to be kicked or bitten, again.

These horrors come to feel normal, and the normal world recedes into distant strangeness. On a recent weekend I took a Pilates class. We stretched and bent and complained about our stressful week. But how can I share anything of my week lightly? Stress seems the wrong word.

On the walk home, I browsed a housewares shop. I wanted to swipe all the rose-gold salad servers and marble cheese plates off the table, smash them to bits. Who let this other world exist? How can we reconcile the two?

As doctors who are more stoic than I will tell you, there is some inevitability to the difficulty of our jobs. Blood and urine and human suffering cannot be escaped. We must face death and our shame for the times we couldn’t hold death back for long enough. We need to know a lot, and that takes time, and that time will be stolen from time that should be spent with children, novels, friends, the ocean. We will make mistakes.

But as we talk about the ways we can halt the progression from distress to burnout to mental illness to death, we are realizing that not all of our suffering is inevitable. There are practical changes that can be made. We know we could improve doctor well-being with better working hours and by changing practices that leave doctors in fear of being branded “impaired” if they seek help for mental distress.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the aftermath of recent suicides, these are exactly the things that are being proposed in my home state. And Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney is rolling out a program for the well-being of doctors in training, which includes mindfulness and resilience training, and personal training for physical health. Those who have created the program note that when doctors develop skills to manage their own well-being, it makes it easier for them to teach these skills to patients.

Beyond such practical steps, there is the matter of medical culture that must be addressed. The unrelenting, unforgiving culture of medicine that weighs its junior members down with debt and duty. Medicine says you chose this, so don’t complain. Medicine says stop being selfish and think of the patients. Medicine says just one more year and the worst will be over, and medicine keeps saying that year after year.

We need to let go of our shiny doctor selves and accept the vulnerability, doubt and imperfection within, rather than try to obliterate it. We need to find kindness for ourselves, our medical and nursing colleagues, and our patients because sometimes that is the only thing that makes this path bearable. We need a medical culture that sees humanity as a precondition for being a good doctor, not an obstacle.