Are you hesitating about incorporating emails into your online marketing strategy? Think that this method is past its prime? Well, think again.

More than 70% of customers chose email over other online channels, including social media, mobile apps, direct mail, and text messaging. Not convinced? How about the fact that email has an average ROI of $38 for each $1 spent?

One of the biggest reasons why customers prefer emails over other promotion channels is personalization. Marketing emails can be highly personalized, down an individual user level, which is appreciated by prospects and customers.

For companies, there are several excellent reasons for using email marketing. First, it’s ridiculously cheap compared to other methods. The largest financial investment is in customer relationship management software, but after that, the cost of each individual message is minimal.

Second, good marketing emails are effective because they're action-oriented. For example, they can include direct calls-to-action to drive traffic to your website, which can also be highly personalized.

Third, companies can easily measure and evaluate the performance of email marketing campaigns. This, in turn, provides an opportunity to make data-driven decisions to optimize and improve.

To master email marketing, companies should design a range of specific emails to send to prospects and customers, with each as personalized as possible, corresponding to the interests and experience of the receiver.

In this nifty infographic below, the experts from Assignment Helper have described these emails as well as their functions, along with some pro tips. Additionally, the infographic includes some useful stats from recent studies that'll help you to avoid mistakes like annoying emails and unwanted design elements.

Whether you're an eCommerce store owner looking to get started with email marketing, or an online marketer in need of more knowledge, you'll find this guide helpful.

This post originally appeared on Irfan Ahmad's blog.