“This was built as a pension, but we decided to pay as we go along so people can see the model works,” said Al Brenner, a board member. “Also, it’s been 10 years, and in some cases it was right to sell. But we’re extremely cautious and don’t want to sell too soon.”

The trust has sold only a minor fraction of its holdings of more than 14,000 artworks by 2,000 artists from 81 countries, making it one of the world’s largest private art collections. To build the collection, each artist is asked to invest 20 artworks over a 10-year period.

Since it began, it has added 100 to 120 artists every year, and it plans to continue growing, if at a slower pace. Selection is determined by committees from Asia, Europe and the Americas. Each committee nominates new candidates in its region every three months. Non-nominated artists can also apply online.

Last year, the trust received 833 applications and admitted 12 percent.

Its artists are divided into eight regional trusts, each capped at 250 members. A ninth trust, the Global Trust, which opened in 2013, has a limit of 628 artists. Most are full, or nearly so.

To make room for growth, there are plans to open a second Global Trust, which will admit artists from all locations.

Once a work is sold, 40 percent of the proceeds goes to the artist who created the work, and 32 percent is set aside for the other artists in the same trust. The remaining 28 percent goes to expenses and dividends for approximately 50 private investors.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

This month’s distributions, set for the New York and Los Angeles artist pools, the first to fill up, will be “under $1,000 per artist,” said Mr. Brenner, but the amount is expected to increase in the future as more art is sold. Also, an artist’s share grows with the number of works invested, a plan meant to encourage artists to invest the full 20 works.

To raise enough money to provide for its members, the trust is banking on the outsize success of 3 percent to 5 percent of its artists, whose works will reach a value of at least $500,000. Among its artists are numerous highly collectible names, including Douglas Gordon, Y. Z. Kami and Iván Navarro.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Shniberg contends that even those artists who command the highest prices have an incentive to participate in the fund.

“This way they have financial security if they fall out of favor,” he said. “Today you can be in the most important art magazine, but in three years, it could be different,” he said. “But for those who are lucky and do remain successful, their thinking is that in the ‘worst’ case — actually the best case — they will be supporting their fellow artists.”

Along with changing its distribution plan, the trust no longer defines itself as a financial product but as a kind of artist cooperative, providing services as varied as free storage and transport, or a loans-and-exhibitions program that promotes the work of artists internationally.

Indeed, some artists have joined more for the community support than the financial advantages.

“I’m aware the ultimate goal is financial security for the future, but it’s not the reason why I joined,” said Alicia Paz, a Mexican artist who lives in London. “I’m more interested in the networking and the support structure for the now.”

Huma Mulji, a Pakistani artist and trust member who lives in Bristol, England, said, “I am skeptical of any kind of financial services that claim to make your money grow.” He added, “But there was transparency in our conversations, and I was at a point in my career where I benefited more than A.P.T. I was making large-scale objects, which did not always have a queue of buyers.”

The gallery owners who represent the artists say the loss of some of their artists’ work to the program is not an enormous sacrifice because it occurs gradually. But some do wonder if the financial benefits for the artists will turn out well.

“It’s so early in the process that it’s difficult to say how it will work as a full-fledged retirement plan,” said Candice Madey, owner of On Stellar Rays, a gallery in the Lower East Side of Manhattan. “But the model is very interesting, and I am very curious to see where it is in 20 years.”