Stopping at a drive-thru can kill a healthy diet. But there are less-bad options on fast food menus, and Gwyneth’s latest newsletter suggests a few. Surprisingly, their picks are healthy and most won’t result in you starving to death. Here’s a breakdown.



Starving (though not actually to death) is a concern with this kind of advice: always be wary of “healthy” picks that are low calorie. An all-lettuce salad might keep you under your calorie count, but it’s not going to fill your belly. And it’s not going to nourish you; it’s just water you can chew on. That’s why it’s important that GOOP named menu items that make realistic meals. Some of their picks are better than others, though. Check out the top three:

Advertisement

Starbucks: GOOP recommends the egg white and red pepper flavor of the sous vide egg bites, plus the hearty veggie and brown rice salad bowl. That’s a 600-calorie meal with 23 grams of protein, 29 grams of fat, and 63 grams of carbs. Not a bad lunch, although it’s pricey for fast food, at around $11.

Chipotle: The only nutritional difference between a salad (their suggestion) and a burrito bowl is that when you order a salad, they offer you a cup of salad dressing. So this one is all up to what you decide to put in. They suggest leaving off the sour cream and cheese, and including rice only “if you’re hungry.” So if we leave off the rice and get black beans and guacamole as they suggest, and say yes to the dressing, that’s a 690-calorie meal with only 11.5 grams of protein but a whopping 48 grams of fat (about half from the guac and half from the dressing), and 59 grams of carbs. This is easy to tweak, though. Run your choices through Chipotle’s nutrition calculator for a personalized calorie count.

Wendy’s: You’ll go hungry if you take GOOP’s recommendation for a half-size Power Mediterranean Chicken Salad. They say it’s “actually really generous” but that’s not a word I would use to describe something that’s just 240 calories. Go for the full instead, at 450 calories, with 20 grams of protein, 9 grams of fat, and 22 grams of carbs. Or forget the health halo of a salad and get the grilled chicken sandwich, which packs 35 grams of protein into just 360 calories. (It’s also got 8 grams of fat and 38 grams of carbs.) The sandwich is a bargain at $4.89, but you can also order it with a side salad as a combo and then you’re getting a full 620-calorie meal (with lettuce, even!) for the same price as the Mediterranean salad.

Advertisement

If you’re stuck with fast food for lunch, the picks above are decent options. For more ideas on what to eat when you’re picking off a roadside menu, check out our tips on choosing the least unhealthy options at fast-food joints.