Helen’s work was discovered by the fashion designer and boutique owner, Steven Alan. “Helen does pottery,” a friend had recommended, prompting her to consider the potential of her hobby: “I thought no, I don’t really do it—just because I’d never really conceptualized it as that—it was just something I always loved,” says Helen today. He was the first to place an order and the oversized planter piece from that very first selection is still something she makes today. “I’ve been experimenting with terracotta planters. I like them to be big enough to hold a small indoor tree,” she explains. This focus on nature flows through all of Helen’s work and she prefers to make distinctions through the type and color of clay she uses than through elaborate glazing methods. “I get more inspired by colors of material than I do by glaze so I work a lot with tinted clay and marbling for that reason,” she explains.

Her collections vary in the waves of colored clay and the chosen styles of objects but all are inspired by the elements. ‘Beach’, ‘Ocean’, ‘Desert’ and ‘Celestial’ are just a few in the Helen Levi series. “I’ve experimented using found materials like dirt in my glazes and I’d say I’m directly inspired by the landscape,” she enthuses. “It’s the source of the most beautiful shapes, textures, and colors…” So much so that a blue/grey-hued tumbler echoed the horizon line at the beach in Islay, Scotland where Helen collaborated on a whisky series with Scotch distillery, Bruichladdich. “That tumbler worked out so beautifully with the water but I didn’t color match it—it just worked out that way. Sometimes you can’t plan it. With pottery there’s a certain attitude you have to adopt of just letting go.” Another happy accident for Helen (although she argues most are not happy, just frustrating) was her celestial glaze that didn’t activate in the way she had planned but now she really loves it.

Taking time out of her day to walk her dog Billy in Red Hook Park, Helen describes the importance of having that freedom and time away from the wheel to help her progress. “At the weekends I love taking Billy to Prospect park right in the middle of Brooklyn. It’s so big that once you start walking you really don’t hear the street anymore, you don’t see buildings anymore, you feel much more remote than you actually are, that’s important for me.” Helen is arguably one of a few notable emerging ceramic artists in the US. Her spirited pots are both a result of her attention and inspiration taken from her surroundings, and importantly, a lifetime of growing to learn the characteristics of clay and what can be achieved with the medium. “It feels most exciting to me that there’s always going to be more I can learn about it, there’s always going to be different techniques like using colored slip for example. I get a lot of ideas just from the actual physical technique. And to me, that feels endless.”