Collins maintained that he did not think Wright was about to retire, stating that Wright “thinks he owes the game and the organization his max effort to get back on the field and he is doing that.’’

“He’s a special person,” Collins added in comments to SNY.

Still, Wright last played in a major-league game on May 27, 2016. A week later, he was placed on the disabled list with a herniated disk in his neck. And a short while later, he underwent surgery to address that problem.

Although the Mets went into 2017 with some hope that Wright would contribute, it became clear in spring training — when he encountered significant difficulties with his right shoulder — that he was nowhere near ready to play.

Wright did finally return to action recently in several rehabilitation games for the Mets’ Class A affiliate in Port. St. Lucie, and he actually was targeting a return to the Mets’ active roster before the end of this season. But on Aug. 29, he was shut down yet again because of pain in the same shoulder.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“After playing in a few games, I continued to have shoulder pain. So I decided to go to the doctor and get it checked out,” Wright said in a statement released at the time. “Will make any decisions going forward after my appointment.”

Now, after consulting with doctors, Wright has learned that he will need surgery again. And given how many problems his right shoulder has caused him — even when he has been able to play in recent seasons, his throws from third base have often been suspect — any future he may have with the Mets may be at first base, where throwing is less vital.

All of this has been hugely dismaying for the only standout player in Mets history to have played his entire career in Queens. There is still a good chance that whenever Wright does retire, it will be as a Met, but the expectations that he would compile huge career numbers for the Mets — giving the franchise a distinction it now lacks — are no longer realistic.

Wright, who made his Mets debut in 2004, does hold the franchise record in a dozen offensive categories, including hits (1,777), runs batted in (970), runs (949) and doubles (390). He is second to Ed Kranepool, who played 18 seasons for the Mets, in games played with 1,583.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

How much those numbers will grow, if at all, remains to be seen. Right now, they are good, not great, a reflection of what injuries have done to Wright’s career.

Indeed, since learning of spinal stenosis in May 2015, Wright — whose career numbers include a .296 batting average, 242 home runs and an .867 on-base plus slugging percentage — has played in just 67 games, batting .230 with 11 home runs and 27 R.B.I. He is owed $47 million for the remaining three years on his contract.

Wright’s run of serious injuries actually began in 2011, with a stress fracture in his lower back that cost him two months of the season. Then came a hamstring strain in 2013 that caused him to miss six weeks; inflammation in his right rotator cuff that ended his 2014 season in September; the spinal stenosis diagnosis that shelved him from May to late August 2015; and the herniated disk surgery a year later.

“It’s sad with all the work that he put in all this time, and now at this time of the season he has to go and have surgery,” Jose Reyes said to reporters in the clubhouse. Reyes broke into the Mets alongside Wright on the left side of the infield when the future seemed filled with immense promise and then rejoined him on the team last year. “You never want that to happen to nobody, especially with all the stuff he’s been through lately. It’s tough.”