New research seems to prove the theory that brainy people spend more time lazing around than their active counterparts.

Findings from a US-based study seem to support the idea that people with a high IQ get bored less easily, leading them to spend more time engaged in thought.

And active people may be more physical as they need to stimulate their minds with external activities, either to escape their thoughts or because they get bored quickly.

Scientists discover elixir of youth

Researchers from the Florida Gulf Coast University gave a classic test – dating back three decades - to a group of students.

The ‘need for cognition’ questionnaire asked participants to rate how strongly they agree with statements such as "I really enjoy a task that involves coming up with new solutions to problems", and "I only think as hard as I have to".

The researchers, led by Todd McElroy, then selected 30 ‘thinkers’ and 30 ‘non-thinkers’ from the pool of candidates.

Over the next seven days both groups wore a device on their wrist which tracked their movements and activity levels, providing a constant stream of data on how physically active they were.

Results showed the thinking group were far less active during the week than the non-thinkers.

Chocolate is good for your brain

The findings of the study, published in the Journal of Health Psychology, were described as “highly significant” and “robust” in statistical terms.

But the weekends showed no difference between the two groups, something which has not been able to be explained.

Researchers suggested the findings could lend weight to the idea that non-thinkers get bored more easily, so need to fill their time with physical activity.

In pictures: Dogs' brains scanned in first such study







+ show all In pictures: Dogs' brains scanned in first such study

















1/10 Hungary Owner Dora Kettinger talks to her dogs after an examination in a neurology clinic in Budapest

2/10 Hungary Dora Kettinger arrives with her dogs at a neurology clinic in Budapest

3/10 Hungary Malna (Raspberry), a Border Collie, waits in a neurology clinic in Budapest

4/10 Hungary Maverick, a Border Collie, lies in a MRI scanner in a neurology clinic in Budapest

5/10 Hungary Hungarian researchers conducted the first comparative dog and human brain study with developing dog training methods to make them lay motionless in MRI machines

6/10 Hungary Owner Kata Fodor (L) talks to her dog Walter, a Golden Retriever, after an examination in a neurology clinic in Budapest. The study was done to understand how dogs can be so remarkably good at tuning into the feelings of their owners

7/10 Hungary Ethologist Marta Gacsi (R) talks to Walter, a Golden Retriever, before an examination in a neurology clinic in Budapest

8/10 Hungary Walter, a Golden Retriever, waits in a neurology clinic in Budapest

9/10 Hungary A dog has its brain scanned

10/10 Hungary Dogs and humans have brains that respond to voices in the same way, scientists have learned. The same area of the brain activates in both species when they hear a voice - whether it be the human command 'sit' or a doggy whine

But the downside to being brainer – and lazier – warned Mr McElroy was the negative impact of a sedentary lifestyle.

He suggested that the less active people, no matter how clever they are, should aim to raise their overall activity levels to improve their health

The British Psychological Society quoted the study, saying: "Ultimately, an important factor that may help more thoughtful individuals combat their lower average activity levels is awareness.

"Awareness of their tendency to be less active, coupled with an awareness of the cost associated with inactivity, more thoughtful people may then choose to become more active throughout the day."

Despite highlighting an unusual trend, generalising the findings should be done with caution due to the small sample of participants, it added.