“I hope and expect that Larry will lead a rethinking of what the print newspaper should be in an era when so many people get their basic news 24/7 digitally,” said L. Gordon Crovitz, a former Wall Street Journal executive who co-founded Press+, a technology for media companies. “Too many daily newspapers still focus on reporting what happened yesterday, despite many readers having learned yesterday what happened yesterday.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But even with all the digital innovation at USA Today and other newspapers, the growth in online readers and digital advertising revenues are still not making up for the sagging fortunes of their core newspaper product. The secular decline in print circulation and advertising continue to weigh heavily on newspaper company financials, making growth in their online and mobile offerings the last, best hope for survival.

USA Today’s parent, the Gannett Company, one of the nation’s largest newspaper chains, has suffered along with the rest of the industry. Gannett has been aggressively acquiring television stations to increase earnings, but its newspapers, which still account for two-thirds of total revenue, are reeling. The company’s publishing division, which includes nearly 100 daily newspapers, posted a 3.3 percent decline in revenue during the first quarter of 2014 compared with the first quarter of 2013.

Photo

In many respects, Mr. Kramer — both an old-school newspaperman and online journalism pioneer — is the ideal publisher to lead USA Today toward a digital future. After earning a master’s degree at Harvard Business School, he started his journalism career in 1974 as a reporter for The San Francisco Examiner and, after stints at The Trenton Times and The Washington Post, returned to The Examiner to become its executive editor.

He left The Examiner to become an entrepreneur and was early to understand that the power of the web lay in its ability to deliver immediate information. In 1997, at the advent of the first Internet boom, he started the financial news site MarketWatch for the Data Broadcasting Corporation.

Mr. Kramer found himself in the middle of dot-com mania. After CBS formed a joint venture with Data Broadcasting, he took MarketWatch public in 1999 and watched the company’s stock rise 475 percent on its first day of trading. It reached $120 a share and then plummeted to $2 — all in the first year.

He kept the company afloat despite the bursting of the tech bubble, and in 2005 Dow Jones acquired MarketWatch for more than $500 million. His share was about $20 million. After the sale, Mr. Kramer ran CBS’s digital unit before moving on to become a media investor and consultant.

Photo

When executives at Gannett approached Mr. Kramer in 2011 about the USA Today job, he was enjoying his semiretirement. But the company told him: “We are lost. We want to reinvent the paper for the future, but we don’t know how.”

Being needed appealed to him, as did a new challenge. “You have to have an ego of a journalist to think you can have any impact on the future of journalism,” said Mr. Kramer, who is married to Myla Lerner, a theater producer, with whom he has two grown children.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Gannett has a lot riding on Mr. Kramer. After years of having the largest circulation of any American daily newspaper, USA Today began to slip in 2009. It relied heavily on bulk circulation at hotels and airports, and was hit hard when businesses cut back on corporate travel in the wake of the financial crisis.

Mr. Kramer has worked with Gannett’s executives to stabilize the newspaper’s print circulation. This spring, he rolled out Gannett’s plan to place four to six pages of branded USA Today content in 35 of the company’s largest papers, including The Cincinnati Enquirer and The Tallahassee Democrat. Last year, in part because of the new initiative, USA Today reclaimed the largest circulation paper title from The Wall Street Journal, according to the Alliance for Audited Media.

Photo

And for all the paper’s digital growth, Mr. Kramer acknowledges that, like others in the industry, he is wrestling with how to make money online. Gannett’s growth in digital publishing revenues, which includes online advertising, is slowing. To spur revenue, Gannett has put up paywalls at its local papers, but Mr. Kramer says the company has not yet decided whether USA Today will charge readers for its content.

For now, he and USA Today’s editor in chief, David Callaway, are coming up with all sorts of strategies to drive Internet traffic. All of the paper’s journalists have tools allowing them to track the online viewership of their stories. An electronic board displayed prominently in the newsroom tracks overall top performers. Reporters are not penalized if their articles do not make the list, but their skills at promoting their articles online are considered as important as front page bylines.

In addition to Social Media Tuesdays, they run informal contests to motivate the newsroom staff of 430. Competitions have included who can create the most viral headline or add the most new Twitter followers in a given time.

A premium is placed on reporters’ speed and digital output. Because search engines give higher rankings to USA Today’s original content rather than wire service stories, Mr. Kramer has insisted that 95 percent of its digital content is produced in-house — and goes up quickly. Only 15 percent of the USA Today online stories run in the print edition. “Reporters have to write 5- and 30-minute stories,” Mr. Kramer said.

Susan Page, the paper’s Washington bureau chief, said she and the staff appreciated the energy Mr. Kramer has brought to the paper and its online operations. “We file more and we file faster,” she said, “and we file without consideration of whether it will make the print edition.”