Wikileaks strikes again – this time at the heart of Hillary’s campaign’s corrupt backroom relationship with the mainstream media. Via a new email dump, we now know of at least 65 mainstream media reporters that were working closely with the Clinton campaign during the 2016 presidential election cycle. On multiple occasions, these 65+ reporters were invited to Hillary Campaign Chairman John Podesta’s house for intimate private dinners.

It’s worth noting that 0 Fox News reporters made the list.

As previously reported by the Gateway Pundit, at least 38 top national reporters attended a different dinner at John Podesta’s house in April of 2015. While some initially questioned the report from the gateway pundit here is a screenshot from wikileaks offical twitter feed which certainly seems to agree this report. (So it would certainly seem odd to say the report misstated wikileaks position/feelings on the matter)

The Clinton campaign sent out invites to big-name mainstream reporters in April 2015 for their off-the-record meeting on how to sell Hillary Clinton to the public:

After attending the dinner, these 38 reporters have lost all credibility and should step down from their positions within the public eye:

The email dump also revealed another Podesta dinner party for a different group of 25 reporters on April 9!

“Here is the current RSVP list to the Thursday Night (4/9) dinner at Podesta’s. As a reminder, this is with the 25 reporters more closely following HRC (aka the future bus).” Yes ABC – Liz Kreutz Yes AP – Julie Pace Yes AP – Ken Thomas Yes AP – Lisa Lerer AURN – April Ryan Yes Bloomberg – Jennifer Epstein Yes Buzzfeed – Ruby Cramer Yes CBS – Steve Chagaris Yes CNBC – John Harwood Yes CNN – Dan Merica Yes Huffington Post – Amanda Terkel NO (Panama) LAT – Mike Memoli Yes LAT – Evan Handler Yes McClatchy – Anita Kumar Yes MSNBC – Alex Seitz-Wald Yes National Journal – Emily Schultheis Yes NBC – Mark Murray Yes NPR – Tamara Keith NYT – Amy Chozik Yes NYT – Maggie Haberman Yes Politico – Annie Karni Politico – Gabe Debenedetti Yes Reuters – Amanda Becker The Hill – Amie Parnes Yes Washington Post – Anne Gearan Yes WSJ – Laura Meckler Yes WSJ – Peter Nicholas Yes WSJ – Colleen McCain Nelson

We also know that Politico’s chief political correspondent Glenn Thrush was sending the Hillary campaign articles for them to review before publication, to ensure the articles would not cause conflict for the HRC campaign.

Furthermore, we know CNBC and New York Times reporter John Harwood was working with the Clinton campaign to help Hillary appear more favorable to the public.

At least 65 mainstream media reporters were colluding with the Hillary campaign in order to make her appear more likeable to the public.

Yet the mainstream media wants us to believe they weren’t biased, and weren’t deeply in the tank for another Clinton White House?

Draw your own conclusions.



Source : Breitbart

H/T The Intercept

Report Content Issue: *

Grammar Spam Inaccurate Information Broken Links or Images Other Your Name:

Your Email:

Details: *

Submit Report