Not quite a century ago, Vienna was downgraded from being the glorious capital of a sprawling empire to the capital of just one country, Austria. What remains undiminished is the city’s reputation as a capital of high living.

Virtually any activity you might undertake in the city — strolling through a museum, sipping coffee or shopping for shoes — will leave you feeling pampered and a little envious of the indulgent style to which the Viennese seem so accustomed. This is, after all, the city where chocolate cake and sparkling wine are an appropriate snack at any hour, where the Wiener schnitzel is typically bigger than the plate on which it’s served, and where residents all know how to waltz.

But the place once famous as the crossroads of Central Europe is now getting traffic from farther afield, with influences pouring in from Turkey, the Middle East and the rest of Asia.

This year marks the 150th anniversary of the Ringstrasse, the grand boulevard that encircles the monument-dense First District, where visitors traditionally find most diversions. It’s also a great year to venture into less luxurious but perhaps more lively quarters. Vienna sparkles in any season but has a special appeal in winter when lingering in a cozy cafe or in front of a Klimt portrait of a radiant beauty can feel as luxurious as lying on a Caribbean beach.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Friday

1. ­Meet the Hapsburgs | 4 p.m.

You can’t see everything in this city full of spectacular museums, but this is not the season to skip the Kunsthistorisches Museum. Having lent Rembrandts and Vermeers and Bruegels to other museums over the years, the Kunsthistorisches has called in favors to mount its first exhibition of works by the 17th-century master Velázquez, court painter to the Spanish king, Philip IV. On view through Feb. 15, the exhibition unites signature works by the artist and highlights the links (some might call it inbreeding) between the Hapsburg rulers in Spain and their Austrian cousins. Tickets, 14 euros, or $16.80 at $1.20 to the euro.