You trademarked your brand or company name and you can use a trademark symbol going forward. That's great news, but knowing when and how to use that symbol can be confusing. I'm frequently asked whether or not trademark symbols have to be used in specific marketing pieces. They can cause a clean piece of marketing collateral to become a cluttered visual mess, but people are still afraid to omit them from marketing pieces.

To confirm my own knowledge and share the do's and don'ts of trademark symbols with you from a legal perspective, I caught up with my go-to trademark expert, intellectual property attorney Kelley Keller, Esq. of The Keller Law Firm. Following are answers to questions about when and how you can use trademark symbols so you know what to do next time you need to create a brochure, ad, website, and so on.

Susan Gunelius: Could you explain what the different trademark symbols are for and what they're used for?

Kelley Keller: There are three commonly used trademark symbols: TM, SM, and the letter R in a circle -- ®.

The TM and SM symbols are used with unregistered marks: TM for trademarks, or marks that represent goods, and SM for service marks, or marks that represent services. The federal registration symbol, or ®, is reserved for marks registered in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.

Susan Gunelius: When should the trademark symbols be used?

There is no requirement to use the TM or SM symbols and their use has no legal significance, but it is wise to do so. When you use the TM or SM, you notify the public of your claim of branding rights in a particular mark and in turn dissuade others from adopting the same or similar mark for the same or similar products or services. This staves off unwitting trademark infringement, which disrupts the free trade of goods and services in the marketplace.

Use of the federal registration symbol, however, is regulated by federal law. You may only use the symbol with a federally registered mark and as applied to the goods and/or services listed in the registration. While you are not legally required to use the symbol, failure to use it is not without consequence. In an enforcement action, you will forfeit your right to recover lost profits and money damages unless you can prove the defendant had actual knowledge that your mark was registered prior to the infringing activity. This can be a very high burden and one unnecessary to bear.

The law provides that if a trademark owner uses the registration symbol properly, then any future defendants will be deemed to have constructive knowledge of the mark’s registration. This means that even if they did not have literal knowledge of the registration, it is reasonable to conclude that they should have known the mark was registered. In simple terms, no one can feign ignorance if the registration symbol is properly used.

Susan Gunelius: How should people use trademark symbols?

Kelley Keller: The appropriate symbol should appear in superscript in the upper right-hand corner of a mark. If it is not practical or aesthetically displeasing to place it there, it should be dropped to the lower right-hand corner of the mark. A symbol should not be placed above, below, or to the left of a mark. Placement is not regulated by law, but adherence to norms is strongly advised.

In written documents – articles, press releases, promotional materials, and the like -- it is only necessary to use a symbol with the first instance of the mark, or with the most prominent placement of the mark. It is a common misconception that each and every instance of the mark should bear a trademark symbol. Overuse creates visual clutter and may detract from the aesthetic appeal of the piece. Provided there is at least one conspicuous use of the TM, SM, or ® on the face of the writing, do not be afraid to eliminate superfluous markings.

Susan Gunelius: What are the most important takeaways that the audience should know about trademarks?

Kelley Keller: Use TM or SM for unregistered marks only. This includes marks that are the subject of a still-pending application in the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. Use TM for marks that represent goods and SM for marks that represent services. If your mark covers both products and services, TM is recommended.

Only use the encircled R for federally registered marks. State registrations do not qualify. Use of this symbol is a privilege and should be treated as such at all times.