By Anna Fifield

PYONGYANG — “What are you here for? Are you a tourist?”

The man at the immigration counter was looking at me, but smiling, as I hesitated.

“Are you a news collector?”

“Yes, that’s exactly what I am, I’m a news collector,” I responded.

And with that, he stamped my passport and I was back in North Korea.

North Korea is gearing up for a once-in-a-generation Workers’ Party congress starting this Friday, and as a result, this most reclusive country has let in a bunch of journalists, including three of us from The Washington Post.

Photojournalist Linda Davidson, video journalist Jason Aldag and me, Anna Fifield, a pen-and-paper journalist, will be reporting from here over the next week, covering the preparations for the party congress and hopefully the congress itself.

This is my seventh reporting trip to North Korea and, as always, our itinerary over the next week will be tightly choreographed so we only see what the regime wants us to see, and we have been assigned two minders, Mr. Pak and Mr. Jang, to accompany us everywhere.

Some things have started out well. We journalists have been given a big round conference room — think the U.N. — with surprisingly fast Internet (something that’s denied to all but a handful of elites in this country), which will enable us to file quickly.

We’re under no illusions that we will be seeing the “real North Korea” this week. That North Korea is the country where ordinary people, starved of information and food, struggle to get by. In this showcase capital, life has improved sharply since Kim Jong Un came to power almost five years ago, so the North Korea we will be seeing is the North Korea of the elite who control the country.

Still, we know so little about North Korea that every sliver of information adds to our collective understanding of the place.

We’ll be documenting the entire trip on social media. Here’s how to follow us:

Anna Fifield: Twitter | Instagram | Tumblr

Linda Davidson: Twitter | Instagram

Jason Aldag: Twitter

Here’s some of what we’ve seen of North Korea so far:

We also did a Q&A session Facebook Live from inside North Korea:

Keep following us all week, and visit www.washingtonpost.com to see our reporting from inside the secretive country.