Food is pretty important. Whether you consider yourself a “foodie” or not, you’ve gotta eat, and everyone can use tips on how to eat and cook better, faster, and more healthfully. Here are some of our most popular food hacks from 2016.



There is no shortage of dietary advice in this world, with people telling you how much, what and when to eat. But is breakfast really the most important meal of the day? And does eating every few hours actually keep your metabolism “stoked”? Here’s a look at some of the myths surrounding meal timing.

Save yourself a little energy by turning the burner off once you add the pasta. As long as it reaches a rolling boil before you add the noodles, it will turn out just fine.

Cast iron skillets are a great multi-functional kitchen tool that can last forever if you treat ‘em right and clean them properly. This video shows you how.

Once you know how to care for your skillet, you’re going to want to cook some food in it. Besides super-acidic dishes, there’s almost no limit to the tasty creations you can cook in cast iron, and these five may surprise you.

Kitchen tools can get pretty expensive, and I love a good deal, but there are some culinary gadgets out there that are worth every pretty penny. This list can help you figure out which tools you should treat as an investment. (I bet you can guess my favorite.)

Speaking of fancy kitchen toys, you may have noticed I’m a big fan of the immersion circulator. Both the Anova Precision Cooker and ChefSteps’ Joule are great options, and this showdown can help you pick the right model for your kitchen.



French fries are very important, and you want to make sure you’re getting the most possible potato action with your burger order. One fast food chain beat out all others with a whopping 98 fries per order, which is a beautiful thing.

Single-serving condiment packets are extremely shelf-stable, but they don’t stay tasty forever. This guide can help you figure out how long to keep ‘em so your packet drawer stays in tip top shape.

A waffle iron may seem like a one-trick pony, but you can use this little griddle to whip up all sorts of tasty creations, from fritattas to brownies, all with crispy nooks and crannies.

Smoothies are pretty easy to make, but that doesn’t mean there isn’t an optimal way to craft them. To make sure you get the tastiest frozen concoction every time, follow Alton Brown’s top tips for creating truly excellent smoothies.

Impostor cheese, olive oil, and seafood are all out there, and there’s nothing sadder than buying wood pulp when you meant to buy Parmesan. To ensure you’re getting the real deal when it comes to these oft counterfeited foods, check out our guide on the subject, and trust no one. (Well, you can trust us.)

Chocolate that has been stored improperly can develop an unappetizing, white film on it, making it a poor candidate for dipping and coating. Don’t throw it out though; it still has a few tasty uses.

Not only was white pepper revealed to be the pungent superstar ingredient of KFC’s once secret original recipe, but it turns out more acidic pepper berry can add depth and dimension to all sorts of foods, both sweet and savory.

Stir-fry dishes can be endlessly customized to fit your diet and palate, but it can be easy to get stuck in a stir-fry rut. This graphic shows you how to keep this easy dinner interesting, tasty, and perfectly balanced.

The IKEA food market is a treasure trove of delicious beverages, tasty jams, and all sorts of frozen delights, and we can show you how to make the most of it. (Bonus: These dishes are easier to assemble than 96% of IKEA furniture.)

Advertisement

If you’re still hungry for more great food tips and tricks, check out our best food hacks from 2015 and 2014, and be sure to check out Skillet, where food is the sole, delicious focus.