Last Tuesday’s special election in Georgia provided a vivid example of just how tribal and polarized our politics have become.

The Democratic candidate, Jon Ossoff, bested a 17-candidate field in an April primary, earning 48.1 percent of the vote in the Peach State’s 6h Congressional District. He fell just short of capturing a majority, however, setting up the June 20 finale against Karen Handel, who led a crowded Republican field but ended the primary a distant second to Ossoff, with 20 percent.

We all know what happened: Handel consolidated the Republican vote and romped to victory. Ossoff needed to improve his performance among Republicans and independents by just 2 percentage points. Not only did he fail to bring those voters to his side, he also couldn’t bring along any wider support at all: He earned, for the second consecutive election, 48.1 percent.

These fierce partisan divisions have done a job on our democracy. Most voters — at least 85 percent of them — are now locked into a congressional district that’s so safe for one party or the other that you can predict the winner two years out by looking at partisan data alone.

Some people blame gerrymandering, while others cite geography or rage against dark money. All are corrupting factors. All act as accelerants on the underlying issue: Our winner-take-all system of districting that gives all the seats to the side with 50 percent plus one vote and no representation to the other 49.9 percent. We could end gerrymandering tomorrow and it wouldn’t help the unrepresented Republicans in Connecticut, or Democrats in Kansas, feel like they had a voice in Congress.

A Virginia congressman wants to change this. Rep. Don Beyer, a Democrat, introduced something called the Fair Representation Act this week. Beyer aims to wipe out today’s map of safe red and blue seats and replace them with larger, multimember districts (drawn by nonpartisan commissions) of three, four or five representatives. Smaller states would elect all members at large. All members would then be elected with ranked-choice voting. That would ensure that as many voters as possible elect a candidate of their choice: In a multimember district with five seats, for example, a candidate could potentially win with one-sixth of the vote.

This is how you fix democracy. The larger districts would help slay the gerrymander. A ranked-choice system would eliminate our zero-sum, winner-take-all politics. Leadership of the House would belong to the side with the most votes — unlike in 2012, for example, when Democratic House candidates received 1.4 million more votes than Republicans, but the GOP maintained a 33-seat majority. No wasted votes and no spoilers, bridge builders in Congress, and (at least in theory) less negative campaigning as politicians vied to be someone’s second choice if not their first. There’s a lot to like here.

Beyer knows it’s a heavy lift and that comprehensive reform like this could take time and make some people uncomfortable at first. But he is eager to start a national conversation about reforms that could help vacuum the toxicity and dysfunction from our politics. It’s a conversation well worth having. We spoke last week by phone while he was in Washington.

Often when people talk about electoral reforms, about how we make structural changes to improve our democracy, they settle on things like independent redistricting commissions or campaign finance. What’s exciting about your bill, the Fair Representation Act, is how it attacks the real threat to our democracy: the toxic combination of hardened partisanship, winner-take-all elections and the fact that most congressional districts aren’t competitive at all. Most voters don’t get to participate in elections where their vote really counts.

You’re proposing a truly transformative approach: Larger, multimember congressional districts, combined with ranked-choice voting. How did you come to the understanding that we need to rethink districting and our voting methods themselves if we want to redeem our politics?

Well, I have long supported independent redistricting in order to overcome gerrymandering. My one published essay in my life was in a book about the Virginia General Assembly, about how ugly the redistricting process was in 1991 when I was presiding over the Senate. They were nasty fights, sometimes Democrat versus Republican, but often Democrat versus Democrat — [about] who got to choose the good voters, the secure Democrats, the big givers.

It’s been said so many times now it’s become completely trite: Voters should be choosing the elected officials [rather than] elected officials choosing the voters. But it really came home. Over the years, however, I’ve become increasingly skeptical about how long it was going to take to get legislators in the majority, with power, to willingly give up the ability to set their own districts.

Once politicians achieve that power, they tend to want to keep it. It’s always interesting to see the pledges from legislators in the minority that they really will fix this, once they taste power again. It doesn’t usually happen.

Yes! In the mid-2000s, there were some Virginia legislators, Democrats in the minority, who promised, “We’ll change this when we’re in the majority.” They never did. And sometimes the ones who say they will get redistricted into oblivion or they are retired by the time their side gets back into the majority.

So it seemed like redistricting reform would be a century-long project, at best. I don’t believe there are any referendum states left where this can progress. There’s the legal path and the case before the Supreme Court. Maybe that will work and maybe it won’t.

Then I learned about the fair representation movement. I’ll be honest, I was skeptical at first. I thought, Well, this is unlikely. But the more I listened, the more I thought, Actually, this kills about six birds with one stone.

Walk me through them.

No 1, it gets rid of most of the gerrymandering problems by creating much larger districts, five-person, three-person districts. No. 2, it fulfills the genius of current game theory, which is maximizing voter choice. Even if you’re in the minority, your vote’s still going to matter. No. 3, it overcomes things like Massachusetts having nine members and no Republicans, or Oklahoma or Kansas or Nebraska, where there are significant Democratic populations but every member’s a Republican. It will make our campaigns more civil: You don’t want to do negative advertising when you want to be someone’s second choice rather than their sixth. You want to be high on someone’s list even if you’re not their first choice. And since a significant percentage of the fundraising that we do is to pay for negative advertising, this seems like a very good thing.

It also seems like Congress would function better under a system like this. It’s not that this would produce more centrists — but you’d have a better chance of electing people with open minds, bridge builders. There might be less bowing to the most extreme pieces of your base, out of fear of a primary challenge, and more willingness to work seriously toward solving problems.

I think that’s right. The bottom line is Congress doesn’t work. We can’t get an infrastructure bill. We can’t pass a health care bill that we all agree on. The bills we do pass tend to be on a straight party line. We don’t get legislation where people try to improve each other’s bills — where we can disagree but are forced to work together to find common ground.

Do you ever see any of that now? Those members just don’t seem to exist anymore.