There are a lot of different ways to prepare salmon -- many of them good too -- but there's only one best way to cook this fish and we're going to share it with you.

When we talk about the best, we don't mean a fancy 12-hour preparation of a dinner that you'll finish in 20 under minutes. While we're sure the results of such a recipe would be impressive, we're inclined to believe that the effort is just not worth it. Nope, for us the best recipe is the perfect balance between great flavor and ease. Ease being the operative word here. (We don't want to have to work too hard for a great dinner, and we're pretty certain that neither do you.)

For the easiest recipe, you could always just bake a fillet of salmon with salt and pepper and call it a day. Though that probably wouldn't leave you with a memorable dinner. Luckily, for a impressively delicious salmon recipe that is equally simple to make, it doesn't take much more than salt and pepper to get the job done. Actually, the best -- and only -- salmon recipe that you should be bothering with at home calls for just six ingredients. That's it.

This salmon recipe relies on the simple flavors of a few ingredients like leeks, parsley and lemon to come together in a harmonious way. Not only do the ingredients shine in this recipe, but they make a beautiful presentation too. And the best part is that this recipe takes only five minutes to prep, and 20 minutes to cook (depending on the size of your fillet).

While the fish is cooking, you can use that hands-free time to relax and pat yourself on the back for a job well done, but we recommend taking that time to make mashed potatoes instead. You'll be glad you did when you pair it with this fish.

Salmon Leek Recipe

16 oz fillet of salmon

2 leeks, washed and thinly sliced

1/2 cup of parlsey, chopped

3 Tbs olive oil

1 lemon

Salt and pepper to taste

Preheat the oven to 400 degrees. Place the salmon fillet in an oven-safe container lined with tinfoil. Lightly salt and pepper. Sprinkle with parsley. Top with leeks. Drizzle with olive oil. And squeeze the juice of 1/2 lemon on top. Bake in the oven for roughly 20 minutes or until cooked to desired doneness. The leeks on top should be soft and nicely browned. Serve with fresh lemon wedges. (And mashed potatoes!)

Want to read more from HuffPost Taste? Follow us on Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest and Tumblr.

Get more salmon recipes.

PHOTO GALLERIES Salmon Recipes