White House Press secretary Sean Spicer speaks to the media before President Donald Trump speaks at a rally in Nashville, Tenn., on March 15. | Mark Humphrey/AP White House reporters express mixed feelings over Spicer’s resignation

NBC and CBS broke into daytime programming Friday afternoon to announce that Sean Spicer, the White House press secretary, was stepping down. Cable news networks were wall-to-wall Spicer all afternoon. Reuters broadcast a live shot from outside his home. And social media lit up with comments from journalists, entertainers and civilians alike responding to a staff development that in previous years would have mattered to only a small group beyond the Washington press corps.

The reaction to the Spicer news hit super-star level, a reflection of how his celebrity has grown outside of Washington. Spicer, a veteran political operative, held contentious daily press briefings that often attracted higher ratings than daytime soap operas and was transformed into a pop culture icon – until the White House reverted to mainly off-camera briefings held by Spicer’s deputy.

Story Continued Below

Spicer has, in the six months since his memorable first briefing following President Donald Trump’s inauguration, become at times a singular focus for the media and the organizing principle of so much of the coverage of the White House. He had in many ways become the White House mascot, even more so when “Saturday Night Live” turned him into one of its most popular recurring characters played by Melissa McCarthy wielding a water gun and a motorized lectern.

Spicer had what can be best described as a complicated relationship with the White House reporters who dealt with him. On the one hand, he is a longtime Washington figure who has known – and been personally friendly with – many of these reporters for years. He is intimately familiar with the Washington norms and has, on occasion, been a liaison for the press to an administration that prides itself on its deviation from those norms.

“Frankly on a couple of occasions, Sean Spicer has interceded to open things up to the press,” one veteran White House correspondent said in April.

The most reliable politics newsletter. Sign up for POLITICO Playbook and get the latest news, every morning — in your inbox. Email Sign Up By signing up you agree to receive email newsletters or alerts from POLITICO. You can unsubscribe at any time.

But there was a feeling from many in the press corps Friday that Spicer was at least one cause of what has become an especially combative relationship between the White House and the press and that the change provided an opportunity for a fresh start.

“Sean, whether you liked him or not, tainted his relationship with the press from day one when he used the bully pulpit from to shout at reporters about the size of the inauguration crowd,” said a White House reporter speaking on background because they did not have permission from their outlet.

Another White House correspondent, also speaking on background, said there were some aspects of the Spicer briefings that would missed – and some that would not be missed.

“Spicer wasn’t great at his job but we got to know his moods,” the correspondent continued. “We know he enjoyed the job and sparring with us but was undermined by Trump. I don’t think Trump treated him well. One thing is for sure his fake news rants were annoying and wrong and there were moments when he lied, but [Sarah] Huckabee Sanders does the same things with even less humor and less of a relationship with us.”

Jeff Mason, the White House Correspondents' Association president who worked closely with Spicer as the point-person in negotiations between the press and the White House team, declined to comment beyond “we wish Sean well.”

Anthony Scaramucci, the new White House communications director whose hiring led Spicer to resign, got off to a better start Friday, taking questions from reporters for an extended period of time and receiving high praise for his performance.

“Day One impressions: Anthony Scaramucci is having a very good, very smooth on-camera debut,” the Washington Post’s Ashley Parker said on Twitter.

Breitbart, the former home of White House chief strategist Steve Bannon which hasn’t been particularly warm to Spicer, immediately warmed up to Scaramucci, also calling his debut “smooth” and boasting that he would be a guest on its Saturday radio show. But perhaps in a warning shot, the site featured a story on its home page that noted that Scaramucci once tweeted that trying to “fight globalization is counterproductive” and highlighted other negative comments Scaramucci once made about Trump.

Scaramucci named Sanders as the new press secretary, elevating a Trump favorite and clarifying roles within the communications operation.

The question quickly turned to what Spicer will do next. From the podium Friday afternoon, Scaramucci joked that he hopes Spicer “goes on to make a tremendous amount of money.” Many previous press secretaries have gone into the private sector, like former Obama spokesmen Robert Gibbs, who is communications chief for McDonald’s, and Jay Carney, who is now with Amazon. Others go on to jobs in the media, like Dana Perino, President George W. Bush’s last press secretary, who is now a Fox News host.

While television is a possibility, there is not a clear landing place. CNN quickly shot down the possibility of Spicer joining them, with a spokesperson confirming they had no plans to hire the man who so often tangled with their reporters. MSNBC declined to comment, while Fox News kept the door open.

“We talk to all major players,” a spokesperson for Fox News said.

In fact, it is Fox News where Spicer was to have his first on-camera interview Friday night. He, along with Chief of Staff Reince Priebus, sat down with host Sean Hannity for separate interviews.