So how does this mythical, remade newspaper — or magazine or broadcast station — make money? The relationship strategy provides a number of opportunities across multiple revenue streams and efficiencies.

Start with advertising. At the most basic level, if you are making products and services that are more useful, engaging, relevant, and valuable to people, then you will get greater loyalty, engagement, and usage, and even under the old, CPM-based advertising business, you will have more ad inventory. More important, knowing about people’s interests and needs — at an individual level — will enable you to sell higher-value and highly targeted advertising.

The only way we can fight media’s commoditization at the hands of programmatic and retargeting advertising and the large platforms is by gathering our own first-party data. And the best way to gather that data is not by forcing our users to give it to us through registration, by inferring it through demographics, or by sneakily compiling data from privacy-pillaging services such as Acxiom. No, the best way is by making an open transaction and compact with users, delivering obvious value in return for data. If you learn that someone is a young mother because she uses the great service you provide for young mothers, then she is giving you her consent to use that information — if you use it to her benefit. You will also be able to invite advertisers into the relationship so long as you are both respectful of that mother. That, after all, was always supposed to be the core value proposition of media for advertisers: not sharing impressions, exposure, or even attention — billboards do that (and so it is appropriate that the first and worst form of digital advertising was so named). Rather, we in media are supposed to build relationships of trust with the public and that is what advertisers want to benefit from.

The value of the relationship strategy is perhaps easier to illustrate with another revenue stream publishers are beginning to experiment with: events. It’s a tad ironic that one of the new opportunities in this digital age comes from bringing people together not online but IRL; that is the opportunity Scott Heiferman identified in 2002 when he founded Meetup. Yet many publishers are finding success in convening people to a wide range of events: interviews, lectures, panels, classes, concerts, craft fairs, reaces, festivals. The New York Times built a stage it uses for big-name interviews. Texas Tribune grosses more than $1.5 million a year from its festival and also from weekly, sponsored, public interviews with politicians and officials (including free lunch). The Guardian holds an impressive array of classes (though backed off building a large facility for events). Billy Penn makes lists of the top professionals in one field or another in Philadelphia (an old staple of city magazines and local business newspapers) and then brings them together for events; this accounts for more than half of the startup’s revenue.

Events provide two obvious sources of revenue: tickets and sponsorship. They also bring new costs — venues, booking, ticketing, catering, A/V — and require new skills. It is difficult to make events scale. But there is hidden value in events. There is data here: If people go to the effort to leave home and come to and perhaps pay to join your interview with the home team’s quarterback, your bridal fair, your food festival, your investment class, or the pug Meetup you organize, then you have a strong and reliable signal of their interest in these topics. The key is gathering and using that data to mutual benefit elsewhere, letting it inform your content targeting and creation and how you serve your advertising. The value to the user is not just your content but also the other people in the room: the potential community there. You would be wise to foster ongoing connections among them. When building any of the community services I spoke about above, I would check to see whether and how events could play into your strategy.

Another new revenue opportunity aided by data — one that is still almost unexplored in our industry — is commerce. I keep waiting for the moment when Jeff Bezos turns on a spigot of commerce revenue at the Post. Bezos is the person in the world best positioned to execute on the relationship strategy, for no one knows more about gathering, analyzing, and acting on a user’s data to return relevance and recommendations and to maximize revenue. Amazon and Google are each delving into same-day — and even one-hour — delivery. That should send a jolt up the alimentary canal of every local retailer and of the newspapers that still depend on retailers’ advertising. With highly targeted merchandise recommendations and pricing offers and with convenient mobile ordering and now delivery, I believe local American retail will experience a profound blow. Oops, there goes another newspaper revenue stream.

How can local media companies get a piece of this commerce revenue? At the simplest level, I would experiment with replacing cheap and irritating remnant advertising with commerce units — for example, simple Amazon recommendations and links — taking the often-measly affiliate fees, just to start learning. When items sell well, you can make your own, better deals with merchants and directly with manufacturers. A small set of companies — Gizmodo (nee Gawker) Media, Business Insider, New York Magazine, Wirecutter, Purch Media, and Condé Nast — are beginning to learn the keys to success in commerce. They are essentially creating a new kind of native content, only native to commerce recommendations instead of advertising. The conflict of interest is obvious but so is the this bright side: The success of commerce in media depends on trust and credibility with your users, not audience volume for its own sake. The good news is that commerce can make us less dependent on dwindling advertising. The bad news is that — given customers’ preferences for where they are most likely to shop — commerce will also make us dependent on Amazon just as we are dependent on Google and Facebook for audience and ad revenue.

Clearly, commerce is going to work only with effort in merchandising (one of the many new skills a news organization needs) and that must be fed, once again, by first-party data as well as with relevant content. And so the real benefit of starting commerce now, even before you’re ready, is that it will motivate the business to start building that data. If you know this user is a young parents because she or he uses your young families service, you know which store’s commerce units to serve. If you provide more granular services and you know how old their children are, you can serve more relevant and profitable commerce links. By buying and building large-scale commercial marketplaces, the two most innovative publishers in Europe, Springer and Schibsted, are learning some of these skills.

The bigger question for our mythical metropolitan news organization is whether there is any local commerce revenue to be had with our old friends and customers, local retailers. There are two problems to solve here. The first is delivery. Uber et al are tackling that. Walmart flirted with turning customers into a delivery network. A few newspapers have fantasized about repurposing their trucks to deliver the proverbial piano. The US Postal Service — which is a key competitor in the business of delivering print advertising and thus is as desperate as we are for new revenue opportunities — could well meet the local express delivery challenge. If there is sufficient scale of local, delivered commerce, I hope solutions will emerge for media companies to help local retailers online.

The second problem is data: the stores’ data. Their inventory is usually not stored digitally and thus it cannot be exposed online to customers. To compete with Amazon, local retailers must digitize their inventories. Could we help them? OpenTable found that to offer restaurant reservations online it had to enable restaurants to digitize their own reservation books. Should we do the same thing for retailers? I once wrote a business plan for such an enterprise.

Just as we need to see ourselves as a service rather than a content factory for the public, so do we need to see ourselves as service providers rather than just audience funnels for our advertisers. What else could we do for them? Perhaps we could also help them build and analyze their customer profiles — that would be an example of taking a skill we learn in the relationship strategy and reselling it.

So far I have proposed that we develop revenue streams from the public via events and commerce. Why not subscription and pay walls? In Geeks, I argued that selling content works if you’re making unique content such as entertainment but not if you’re making commodity content such as news and information.

I do, however, believe we have opportunities to earn consumer revenue through membership and patronage — as well as premium content — and I would explore those possibilities with every new community-based service I develop. In thinking through membership, we need to explore new tribes, new rewards, and new contributions:

New tribes: As public radio in the U.S. has learned through long experience, there is a limit to the number of people who will display an affinity to and are willing to pay and support the institution of a radio station: between 6 and 12 percent, I’m told. Membership efforts need to connect with other affinities people have — perhaps around a show or a journalist or a project, in our terms, or better yet around a community in the public’s terms. This speaks to the core of the relationship strategy. I likely will not want to be a member of the Podunk Daily Disgrace, but I might well want to be a supporting member of the Podunk Environmental Club or Society of Volunteer Retirees or Drunk Bakers Club. Identifying self-defined communities is a strategic skill when it comes to enticing customer revenue.

New rewards: We must be aware of a person’s motivation in becoming a member of an organization so we can offer them appropriate incentives — besides just access to our content. They might want social status (the proverbial #humblebrag Public Radio totebag) or a feeling of accomplishment (supporting, say, the Guardian’s project to count every death caused by police in America) or bargains (shouldn’t the Pug Club offer coupons for dog food from our sponsor?).

New contributions: We need to accept and reward value from the public in forms other than just cash. People can give us marketing (recommending our services in social media), sales (bringing in other members), effort (bringing us information), expertise (years ago, accountants and engineers volunteered to work with a Gannett paper’s investigation of hurricane relief in Florida), and data (interests, demographics, behavior, purchase intent — whatever we can use to mutual benefit).

None of this will work if we do not at the same time reconsider the metrics we use to build and run the business and motivate staff. Yes, reach is still valuable for volume-based advertising, which (we hope) will not leave us quite yet. And yes, reach is still necessary for conversion of users down the funnel to higher-value relationships, including commerce and membership as well as subscription and premium content. But reach alone is not a business anymore. It is the beginning.

I would measure my mythical newspaper’s performance on relationship metrics: how many people we know as individuals and members of communities; what we’re doing to get them to provide signals of interest and intent to us (that is, what targeted value we deliver them); how many of those signals we gather; what we know about conversion, and so on. As I argued in Geeks, we need to account for the variable value of a user, driving our business on maximizing the value of each relationship. I would also try to measure how much we are trusted in our communities. And I would track our impact in improving people’s lives as the best indicator of our value. See the work that Chalkbeat, the Center for Investigative Reporting, and Pro Publica are beginning to do here. They are creating mechanisms for reporters to set goals for public-centered impact — not traffic or attention — before they do their work.