Protein is a staple of any healthy diet, particularly if you are looking to lose fat and build muscle.

The NHS reports that eating protein before and after a workout can help your muscles to repair, as well as helping them to grow.

But not all sources of protein are created equal, as fascinating images now reveal.

Nutritionist experts have now shared data that ranks three types of the same protein, such as chicken or fish, by how healthy it is for you.

The healthiest type of fish to eat, revealed. Clockwise, from top: Haddock is a better protein option, salmon is a good option, but cod is the best option, according to nutritionists

The healthiest sources of protein revealed FISH Good - Salmon Better - Haddock Best - Cod PORK Good - Chorizo Better - Sausage Best - Burger BEEF Good - Biltong Better - Burger Best - Steak CHICKEN Good - Sausage Better - Breaded Best - Fillet EGGS Good - One large egg Better - One medium egg Best - One duck egg

Nutritionists at portion control kit company Mealkitt have analysed five types of protein: eggs, chicken, fish, pork and beef.

For each source of protein, they ranked three forms of the product, from 'good,' through to 'better' and 'best'.

The 'best' option isn't always the version that contains the most protein, however.

The nutritionists produced their results based on how lean each source of protein is, as well as taking into account the calorie and carbohydrate content.

Based on this, they then were able to rank the protein sources.

The sources of protein they ranked were: chicken, fish, pork, beef and eggs.

The results may surprise you, as the nutritionists did not always pick what you might consider as the 'healthiest' option for each protein source.

However as a rule of thumb, the less processing the product had, the healthier the nutritionists said it was.

The healthiest type of chicken (left) and pork (right) to eat revealed. Clockwise from top left (left): breaded chicken is a better option, a chicken sausage is a good option, but a skinless fillet is the best option. Clockwise from top left (right): a pork sausage is the better option, a burger is the best choice, and chorizo is a good option

The healthiest type of chicken The Good Option: 100g chicken sausage contains 252 calories, 20g fat, 8g carbohydrates and 10g protein. The Better Option: 100g chicken nuggets contain 242 calories, 13g fat, 18g carbohydrates, 13g protein. The Best Option: 100g skinless chicken breast contains 110 calories, 1.2g fat, 0g carbs and 23g protein.

The healthiest type of pork The Good Option: 100g chorizo contains 455 calories, 38g fat, 2g carbohydrate and 24g protein. The Better Option: 100g pork sausage contains 292 calories, 25g fat, 0g carbohydrate and 16g protein. The Best Option: 100g ground pork burger contains 263 calories, 21g fat, 0g carbohydrate and 17g protein.





The healthiest type of beef (left) and eggs (right) to eat revealed. Clockwise from top (left): Biltong is a better option, steak is the best choice, and burgers are the good option. Meanwhile large eggs are a good option, medium eggs a better option and duck eggs are the best choice, allegedly

The healthiest type of beef The Good Option: 100g beef burger contains 296 calories, 25g fat, 2.7g carbohydrates and 15g protein. The Better Option: 100g beef biltong contains 274 calories, 5g fat, 3.2g carbohydrates and 55g protein. The Best Option: 100g sirloin steak contains 160 calories, 7g fat, 0g carbohydrates and 22g protein.

The healthiest type of eggs The Good Option: One large egg contains 147 calories, 10g fat, 1g carbohydrate and 13g protein. The Better Option: One medium egg contains 65 calories, 4g fat, 0.4g carbohydrate and 6g protein. The Best Option: One duck egg contains 130 calories, 10g fat, 1g carbohydrates and 9g protein

The nutritionists analysed the fat, calorie, carbohydrate and protein content of three types of fish for the test - haddock (top left), salmon (top right) and cod (bottom) - to find which one in their eyes is healthiest