Ensuring that your kids know how to deal with money while they’re growing up gives them a much better shot at a trouble-free economic life as adults.

It needn’t be a topic that you obsess over, and indeed the best the lessons your children will receive will be from observing you in your daily life. For this reason, it is important to be open about what is going on in the household and to discuss problems openly and maturely in front of your kids when appropriate.

As they get older, your children can be directly introduced to increasingly complex aspects of home economics, from saving and earning to budgeting and investments. Give them projects to do, such as saving for a specific treat or buying presents on a budget. Encourage them to get involved when you’re grocery shopping or in the bank so that handling money — and understanding what it means — becomes second nature.

Make these approaches part of growing up and you can instil a responsible and wise sense of economy into your children before they start to handle more serious quantities in their late teens and when they leave home. It’s easy to make an informal education plan: have a look at this new infographic which guides you as to just when it’s best to introduce different facets of finance into junior’s life.

Sources

Gammell, K. 2014. Six tips to teach your child about money matters. guardian.com

Glenn, W. 2014. How to Teach Young Kids Budgeting Habits Early On. lifehacker.com

Schutte, B. 2015. 5 Ways To Teach Your Kids About Investing. forbes.com

Shin, L. 2013. The 5 Most Important Money Lessons To Teach Your Kids. forbes.com

Wells, C. 2015. The Smart Way To Teach Children About Money. wsj.com

Whitebread, D and Bingham, S. 2013. Habit Formation and Learning in Young Children. moneyadviceservice.org.uk

Worden, J.W. (2016). Talking To Children About Death. hospicenet.org

Glenn, W. (2014). How to Teach Young Kids Budgeting Habits Early On. lifehacker.com

Kadlec, D. (2016). Is It Rude to Talk About Money? Millennials Don’t Think So. time.com

Embed This Image On Your Site (copy code below):

Courtesy of: On Stride

About Barbara Davidson Babs is a content writer at Enova International, Inc. with a Bachelors in Cinema Studies and English from the University of Illinois (ILL-INI!). She loves binge watching musicals, reading in the (sporadic) Chicago sunshine and discovering great new places to eat. Accio, tacos! Find out more about her on Google+.

Comments