Have you ever wondered how to make cauliflower fried rice? Well here it is and it’s super easy. You’ll wonder why you’ve never made cauliflower fried rice before because it really is one of those easy 30 minute recipes. If you love asian fried rice but don’t want all the calories, then try substituting the rice with cauliflower! No joke friends, this truly is a game changer in satisfying your fried rice cravings and keeping it low fat and healthier.

When cut into small pieces, cauliflower truly resembles the same bite and texture as rice. This easy cauliflower recipe has minced cauliflower that soaks up all the flavors just like rice, but you doesn’t have all the carbs and calories that rice has.

Healthy and Amazing Cauliflower Fried Rice

This recipe for cauliflower fried rice is super flexible too because you can add what ever you like. Just like any fried rice recipe, this cauliflower version has endless possibilities. Add ground shrimp, chicken, pork, beef or tofu. Add more vegetables if you like. What ever you add, it’ll be delicious so long as you don’t overcook the cauliflower.

Here’s our Favorite ways to make Cauliflower Rice:

Good tools make time in the kitchen all the more enjoyable. Here’s some of the favorites:

Food Processor: This is our favorite food processor for home; linked here. It is a great balance between useable size for the average recipe and how much space is needed to store it.

Hand Cut- The secret is to make sure to keep the cauliflower with a good bite and not cook it to be mushy. Another key factor is to hand-mince it to get the perfect texture. You can use a food processor too, but make sure to not overprocess the cauliflower or else it will be mushy. And every kitchen should have a good knife.



Grate the cauliflower: You can also grate the cauliflower to get the rice texture! Whip out the You can also grate the cauliflower to get the rice texture! Whip out the box grater and go to town.

Pre-cut & bagged: You can also buy pre-cut cauliflower in bags in your frozen food section.

Before and After! Here’s the link to the food processor.

More Fried Rice Recipes, Asian Recipes and Healthy Recipes.

Here’s more Healthy Recipes from our collection:

Zucchini Noodles with Garlic and Parmesan! Recipe Here.

Low Carb Cheesy Saucy Spaghetti Squash that’s super quick and easy. Recipe Here.