Sometimes, preparing a meal isn’t quite as satisfying as actually eating it. After intense labor—shopping, cooking, and setting the table—it’s hard to believe that you can gobble up a dish in a mere 15 minutes.

Not all meals have to be strenuous, though. You can skimp on time without forgoing taste, especially with these salmon recipes. Get ready for healthy and delicious options that won’t leave you exhausted after the end of an already tiring day.

Garlic Lemon Butter Salmon

The blogger behind Rasa Malaysia shares a foil-wrap salmon recipe that provides a savory lemon-garlic combo—and only takes 10 minutes to prepare. What do you have to lose? Get the recipe.

Honey Lime Glazed Salmon

Carrie, the creator of Eating on a Dime, offers a sweet and zesty take on salmon to give it an extra jolt. Take out your cast iron griddle and in 15 minutes, you’ll have yourself a delicious meal. Get the recipe.

Parmesan-Crusted White Wine Dijon Salmon

“White wine.” Need we say more? Blogger Becky Hardin’s filling recipe takes 10 minutes to prep and 15 to cook, so there’s no excuse not to indulge. Naturally, whatever wine you don’t use while cooking needs to accompany your salmon supper, so make sure your glasses are ready. Get the recipe.

Teriyaki Pineapple Salmon

Thanks to the Unicorns in the Kitchen blog, salmon gets the teriyaki treatment with an easy 25-minute recipe. Add pineapple slices to enhance the luau effect—and juicy taste. Get the recipe.

Broiled Salmon with Ginger and Soy

Add an Asian flavor to your salmon with this dish. Though it’ll only take about 15 minutes to prepare, you’ll have to marinate the fish for about 20 minutes. White rice isn’t required, but you’re going to want to pair your dish with some carbs to really feel satisfied. Get our Broiled Salmon with Ginger and Soy recipe.

Cedar-Planked Salmon with Herb Yogurt Sauce

The best thing about this salmon selection— other than the fact that it’s ready to eat in 25 minutes— is how it makes the perfect option for either brunch or dinner. If you can’t decide when to enjoy this tangy fish dish, we suggest having it for both meals. Get our Cedar-Planked Salmon with Herb Yogurt Sauce recipe.

Bourbon Salmon



Basil & Bubbly’s Southern-inspired ideas will make sure bourbon-infused salmon is your new go-to. The simple dish doesn’t even take 20 minutes to prepare. When you’ve had one of those days at work, you can come home to a delectable supper without the hassle—save that for the office. Get the recipe.