This list is limited to unmodified production cars which meet the eligibility criteria below. All entries must be able to be verified from reliable sources.

Eligible cars

Because of the inconsistencies with the various definitions of production cars, dubious claims by manufacturers and self interest groups, and inconsistent or changing application of the definitions this list has a defined set of requirements. For further explanation of how these were arrived at see the above links.

Production car definition

For the purposes of this list a production car is defined as:

being constructed principally for retail sale to consumers, for their personal use, and to transport people on public roads (no commercial or industrial vehicles are eligible); fitted with the original manufacturer supplied road tires; having had 25 or more instances made by the original vehicle manufacturer, and offered for commercial sale to the public in new condition (cars modified by either professional tuners or individuals are not eligible); and being street-legal in their intended markets, and capable of passing any official tests or inspections required to be granted this status.

Further limitations

For the purpose of manageability this list is limited to production cars that are able to reach 0–100 km/h time or 0–60 mph (0–97 km/h) in 3.0 seconds or less for the first list, or cover quarter mile (402 m) from a standing start in 11.0 seconds or less for the second list.

[i] [ii] By 0–100 km/h time or 0–60 mph (0–97 km/h) (3.0 seconds or less)

If an independent time becomes available, that time will be listed over the manufacturer's time regardless if the latter is quicker. Many elements change how fast the car can accelerate to 60 miles per hour (97 km/h). Tires, elevation above sea level, weight of the driver, equipment used for testing, weather conditions and surface of testing track all play a big part in these times.[3] Some measurements exclude the first foot-rollout.[1][2] Most cars are 2-seaters, although a few are family-sized.

[ii] By 1/4 mile or 400 metre times (11 seconds or less)

Table notes

^ Various factors can contribute to variability in car speed test results. British and U.S. car measurements quote 0–60 miles/hour and 1/4 mile times while European car measurements quote 0–100 kilometers/hour and 400 meter times (which translate to 0–96.5606 kilometers/hour and 402.336 meter times, or to 0–62.1371 miles/hour and 1/4.02336 mile times, respectively) a b [1] which according to Car and Driver "can affect the elapsed time by as much as 0.3 second".[2] Furthermore, environmental conditions change how fast the car drives (tires, surface of testing track, elevation above sea level, weight of the driver, and equipment used for testing are all critical). Times sourced for example by Car and Driver, are modified artificially using computer software after the drive test is complete, to theoretically account for how the car would have performed differently given different weather conditions.[3] Some measurements exclude an initial "rollout",which according to"can affect the elapsed time by as much as 0.3 second".Furthermore, environmental conditions change how fast the car drives (tires, surface of testing track, elevation above sea level, weight of the driver, and equipment used for testing are all critical). Times sourced for example by, are modified artificially using computer software after the drive test is complete, to theoretically account for how the car would have performed differently given different weather conditions. a b Car models similar to an already mentioned model but differentiated only by minor package options (for example "convertible editions") are omitted acknowledging that speed results with those editions can be only slightly less fast. In the case of a tie between two cars, since there exist a variety of different opinions regarding the interpretation of, for example, 1/4 mile trap speed results, the car shown first is the one with the earlier model year (of the fast time's represented model, and not necessarily of any driven car) or if both years are the same it goes to the car having the earliest date associated with the performance data's verification or publishing. a b This is the earliest model year of the car that can claim all its following listed data. This is not necessarily the model year of any driven car, the year when testing was performed, the year during which owners took first delivery of the model, the year it was unveiled, or when it was built. a b This is the fastest result tested by independent sources or shown by the manufacturer. ^ This is the fastest result tested by independent reliable sources. ^ This is the result shown by the manufacturer. a b These cars usually have, unless otherwise stated, some combination of 2 seats and a forced induction gasoline mid-engine. Some are produced in limited number (associated with an increase in value ), and those limited production numbers, if any, are stated. a b c Tesla vehicles don’t have traditional model years per se in the sense of design revisions being pushed out annually. For Tesla, the "model year" of any given car is the same as the calendar year that the car was produced but changes and updates, both in hardware and software, are pushed out whenever they are deemed ready. That said, for the purposes of this list, the "earliest model year of the car that can claim all its following listed data" (as per the note at the top of the "Year" column) is technically 2016 for the Model S P100D and the Model X P100D since that is when the 100kWh battery option was introduced even though the software update that made it possible to achieve the times currently listed was only released in 2017. All instances of the Model S P100D and Model X P100D are capable of claiming all their respective listed data if their software are updated to at least the revision which includes the "Ludicrous+" code. No modification by either professional tuners or individuals is necessary. a b Motor Trend´s LaFerrari report published a 9.7 second 1/4 mile only after each 9.9 second result was rewritten to account for weather, and it also revealed that standard car tests performed by Motor Trend involve multiple runs, driving forward in both directions to then compute averages, stating, "[13][14][15] Ferrari didn't allow standard tests on neutral ground for the LaFerrari, the acceleration numbers in the magazines were obtained downhill on the Ferrari test track with a specially prepared car on Ferrari's terms.´s LaFerrari report published a 9.7 second 1/4 mile only after each 9.9 second result was rewritten to account for weather, and it also revealed that standard car tests performed byinvolve multiple runs, driving forward in both directions to then compute averages, stating, " Fiorano ’s downhill front straight was the only place we were allowed to do acceleration runs, and we couldn’t run backward for a two-way average. The data shows the fastest quarter-mile run declining by 18.2 feet from start to finish, or 1.4 percent. For reference, the National Hot Rod Association allows a 1.0 percent maximum grade over the course of a quarter mile. It’s difficult to say how much of an advantage this gives the LaFerrari, but it helps enough that we’ll asterisk these results until we can test a car on level ground". 11.03 sec @ 141.75 mph were measured on neutral ground.

See also