In 1986, I was as ready to leave the closet as I would ever be—but how would I do so? Though I was a third term Democratic congressman from Massachusetts, I had lived too long with the burden of “the gay thing” to treat coming out as a political matter alone. For many years, I was ashamed of myself for hiding my membership in a universally despised group. I’d been afraid of exposure, and angry at myself for my self-denial. I’d felt shame as I watched younger gay men and lesbians confront the bigots openly with a courage that I lacked. After all those years, lying to people was much easier emotionally than finally admitting my lie.

The circumstances of my disclosure were complicated by another factor: I talk too much. Specifically, I shared my decision with more friends and allies than was prudent, and word was starting to get around. This led to an unusual interaction with several members of the media. They remained committed to the “rule” that prominent people should not be outed unless they had been enmeshed in a gay-related scandal, but they were understandably eager to break the story. So various journalists asked me from time to time if they could do so. I consistently said no—I didn’t deny I was gay but invoked their own nondisclosure principle.

Story Continued Below

This arrangement was tested in mid-1986 when a book was published that implicitly, but unmistakably, told the truth about me. The author was Robert Bauman, who’d been a stridently right-wing Republican member of the House in the 1970s. His primary concern was outlawing abortion, but he had followed the conservative movement’s anti-gay line as well. In 1980, before I arrived in the House, he was charged with soliciting sex from an underage male prostitute. His denial of his homosexuality was universally—and accurately—disbelieved, and he was defeated for reelection that year.

In his memoir describing his own gay life, he cited my attendance at a gay pride rally in the company of a friend whom he inaccurately assumed was a romantic attachment. No one reading it could miss the clear import: I was a gay man who enjoyed a media silence that he had been denied.

I was scared. I was ready to come out, but not at his hands, not in that way, and not at that time. This led to two important conversations in the early summer of 1986. The first was with Speaker Tip O’Neill, my fellow Democratic congressman from Massachusetts. As a great admirer of his leadership, I felt obligated to let him know that following the 1983 revelation of Rep. Gerry Studds’ relationship with a male House page, for which Studds was censured by the House, there might be another sex-related controversy in our party that he’d have to handle.

I approached him on the floor of the House, as we were watching a majority vote doom our effort to curtail President Ronald Reagan’s aid to the Nicaraguan contras. I knew this was an inauspicious moment, but I couldn’t stand the suspense of not knowing what his reaction would be. “Tip,” I said, “Bob Bauman has just written a book that says I’m gay.”

“Aw, Barney,” he consoled me, “don’t pay any attention. People are always spreading shit about us.”

“But, Tip,” I said, “the problem is that it’s true.”

He looked stricken, though he immediately made clear it was not my sexuality that troubled him but the negative impact its disclosure would have on my career. “I’m sorry to hear it,” he said. “I thought you might become the first Jewish speaker.”

As upset as I was at the prospect of a premature outing, the fact that a man I respected so much had said such a flattering thing made me feel better.

Meanwhile, O’Neill set about warning his press secretary, Chris Matthews. “Chris,” he said, “we might have an issue to deal with. I think Barney Frank is going to come out of the room.”

With his unerring ability to translate O’Neill’s malapropisms, Matthews quickly made the necessary metaphoric adjustment.

When news of Bauman’s book broke, the Boston Globe’s Bob Healy called and asked if he could come to D.C. to talk with me. As the man in charge of political coverage at the Globe, he faced a dilemma. He did not want to break the no-outing rule, especially as it applied to a politician in good standing with the Globe. But he could not allow his newspaper—by far the dominant source of news in New England—to be scooped on a national story in its own backyard. Healy hoped I would give the Globe the story, but Bauman’s book was not getting much attention, and I told him I was still not ready. When I was, I assured him I would give the Globe an exclusive—that is, I would let them publish the news first. And I promised that if any other media outlet got hold of the matter, I would call him right away.

House Speaker Tip O'Neill and Frank at a 1982 fundraiser for Frank's reelection campaign. | AP Photo

Throughout 1986 and 1987, I continued to speak with friends and colleagues about my impending declaration. The reaction in the LGBT community was unrestrained happiness. This itself was a sign of improvement. When I had asked gay rights activist Steve Endean to take me to a gay bar in 1980, during Congress’s lame-duck session, he was chastised by a senior gay political leader for threatening my cover, thereby endangering an important LGBT political asset. By 1986, the movement’s leaders unanimously believed my coming out would do little, if any, harm to me and a great deal of good for the cause.

Many of my straight political allies and supporters, by contrast, tried to talk me out of it. They said I was a valuable ally on a wide range of other issues—helping the poor, fighting racism, reducing military spending. Their fear was that my influence would diminish. Not surprisingly, perhaps, they signally failed to understand the anguish of life in the closet. “Of course we have no problem with your sexuality,” many said, “but why can’t you keep on the way you’ve been—leading your private life as you want to but without the political baggage of coming out?”

By the spring of 1987, I was ready, but still apprehensive. What followed was a peculiar pas de deux with the Globe. As I had promised, I called the editors and told them that the time had come to go public. They happily replied that they would be glad to receive my statement and interview me about it. I then explained that I did not intend to announce anything, but that I would answer honestly if a reporter asked if I was gay.

I’d thought more carefully about this process than about any other decision I’d ever made. It seemed to me the best way to contain any political damage was to minimize the entire subject. I would do everything I could to downplay the significance of the revelation, and subsequently to insist that my sexuality was “no big deal.” Executing this strategy obviously precluded my initiating the discussion. If being gay was no big deal, people would reasonably ask why I announced it. Politicians are not in the habit of issuing public statements about subjects that they prefer to be ignored.

Barney Frank is a Politico columnist and a former Democratic representative from Massachusetts.