2. Endive

Addictively crunchy, the leaves of this pale veg—which have next-to-no calories—were made for dipping.

3. Red Grapes

They're sweet and they contain a compound that can block fat cells from forming.

4. Snow Peas

These stir-fry faves may help turbocharge fat-burning by up to 30 percent. Woot!

5. Farro

A whole-grain-heavy diet can help blast belly blub—and this one's chewy texture is low-fat.

Make sure you're also stocked with the following ingredients:

Soy, rice, or cow's milk

Chopped raw almonds, cashews, or hazelnuts

Lemon

Low-fat Greek yogurt

Italian seasoning

Red onion

8-inch whole-wheat tortilla

Gruyère cheese

Cinnamon

Now that you're ready to create delicious fat-blasting meals, check out the recipes below!

BREAKFAST

Mitch Mandel

Farro Bowl

Place 1/2 cup cooked farro in a small, microwavable bowl. Add 1/2 cup milk and microwave for 20 seconds. Stir in 1/2 cup grape halves and sprinkle with 1 tsp chopped nuts and 1/2 tsp lemon zest.

RELATED: 31 Healthy Breakfast Recipes That Will Promote Weight Loss All Month Long



LUNCH

Mitch Mandel

Chicken Salad Boats

Mix 1/2 cup shredded dark-meat chicken (skin removed) with 1/4 cup grape halves, 1 Tbsp chopped nuts, 1 Tbsp chopped red onion, and 1 Tbsp olive oil. Season with salt, pepper, and lemon juice to taste. Spread on four large endive leaves to serve.

SNACK

Mitch Mandel

Veggie Dippers

Mix together 1/2 cup Greek yogurt and 1 tsp Italian seasoning. Serve with 1/3 head endive and 1/2 cup snow peas for dipping.

RELATED: 21 Snacks for Flat Abs

DINNER

Mitch Mandel

Chicken Endive Flatbread

Add 1/2 tsp olive oil to a pan on medium-high heat. Add 1/4 cup sliced red onion and cook, stirring frequently, until caramelized, about 20 minutes. Top a tortilla with 1/4 cup shredded Gruyère cheese, 1/2 cup shredded endive, and the onion. Bake in a 425°F oven until the tortilla is lightly browned and cheese is melted, about 10 minutes. Halfway through, top with 1/2 cup fully cooked diced white-meat chicken.



DESSERT

Mitch Mandel

Roasted Grapes with Yogurt

Arrange 15 grapes on a cookie tray and drizzle with 1 tsp olive oil, 1/4 teaspoon cinnamon, and 1/4 teaspoon sea salt. Bake at 450°F until skins become firm, approximately 15 minutes. Top with 1 Tbsp Greek yogurt to serve.

For more healthy recipes and easy weight-loss tips, pick up the April 2015 issue of Women's Health, on newsstands now.