Also receive three bonuses ($97 value). Leave anytime, privacy respected. Get details.

“The 10 big mistakes smart, spirit-oriented women make when seeking a soulmate (and how to avoid them)”

How are you doing in your soulmate search?

The North Node in karmic astrology: revealing your soul mission

☊ Why? Because we meet our soulmates

on our soul path.

If you want to go deeper than the article below, book a private karmic astrology session with me.

Technically, the South and North Node in karmic astrology (also called esoteric or spiritual astrology) are points where the moon intercepts the earth's orbit around the sun. They're important because they're understood to have points of soul magnetism.

Your True Node also called North Node by sign and house, represents your soul mission, due north or soul's journey. It pulls you toward the future.

Your South Node represents your past. Your Achilles heel, and a colourful karmic bucket of people, habits, situations and experiences from current and past lifetimes that are yours to resolve. It also represents the talents you were born with.

You'll notice right away your North Node is (likely) different than your Sun sign, a.k.a. the general astrology you read about in Cosmo or the paper.

While your Sun represents how you achieve and radiate your energy, your North and South Nodes represent the path of your soul.

Why study your North Node?

Clairvoyant Edgar Cayce said that the real value of astrology is understanding our cycles of soul growth: not prediction.

So when someone is seeking their soulmate, I always encourage them to learn about their North and South Nodes. Indeed, I learn more about mine all the time (mine is Cancer in the 12th in case you're curious).

By consciously aligning yourself with your soul mission you align your personality, with your soul. This will not only make your life more meaningful and enjoyable (who doesn't want THAT), but it'll work with what your soul wants for you, instead of working against it.

Consciously working with your North Node also supercharges the law of attraction around your intended relationship.

So the more you engage your North Node, the more likely it will be that you will attract people, events and situations into your life, aligned with your soul mission: like your intended soulmate. Yes — there's a method to my madness.

Interpreting your soul mission

Your soul mission is expressed by sign and by house.

As you may know, there are twelve astrological signs. These symbolically represent different emotions and experiences of life.

There are also twelve astrological houses, representing areas of life or life issues.

Don't have your birth chart? You must have your accurate time of birth to know the house your North Node is expressed. However, do not despair! Even without your full birth information, there's lots to explore. Start there. Here's how you can calculate your own chart online and discover the sign and house of your North Node, for free.

Three steps to activating your soul mission

Here, I'll call your North Node your soul mission, and your South Node your talents and karma.

First, appreciate the talents you've mastered over lifetimes, represented by your South Node. They're the foundation from which you'll launch your future. Second, own your karma by consciously acknowledging the flip side of your talents represented by your South Node: those ingrained not-so-lovely habits which has likely created some karma. THIS is the energy that keeps you stuck. It's your ‘Achilles Heel’. And — it's always the 180 degree opposite to your soul mission. Third, step into your soul mission by adopting new EMOTIONAL RESPONSES, ATTITUDES and ENERGY in the AREAS OF LIFE represented by your North Node.

Comfort zone warning!

Stepping into your soul mission may NOT be easy peasy, and that's okay. Know that it's your soul stretch for this lifetime.

For example, my soul mission is in emotionally vulnerable Cancer (and the heavily karmic, mystical, 12th house), which at first scared the heck out of me. But! Exploring this has been incredible for me as well.

Your North Node sign

Emotional responses, attitudes and energy to adopt

♈ Aries “I am”

♉ Taurus “I have”

♊ Gemini “I think”

♋ Cancer “I feel”

♌ Leo “I will”

♍ Virgo “I analyze”

♎ Libra “I balance”

♏ Scorpio “I desire”

♐ Sagittarius “I understand”

♑ Capricorn “I use”

♒ Aquarius “I know”

♓ Pisces “I believe”

Your North Node house

Life issues to explore. Note! You must have your birth time for

these to be accurate.

First house: “Your true, authentic Self re-born and expressed fully”

Second house: “Your self worth and its expression in the material world”

Third house: “In the moment communication and your environment”

Fourth house: “Family, physical home and emotional foundations”

Fifth house: “Birth children, heart expression and manifestation”

Sixth house: “Your work, health, pets and how you give service”

Seventh house: “Your relationships with others including marriage and business”

Eighth house: “Your intimate relationship, investors, estates, death and re-birth”

Ninth house: “Education, international travel, nature and your personal truth ”

Tenth house: “Your achievement and public reputation outside of family”

Eleventh house: “Receiving love through friendships, and like-minded groups”

Twelfth house: “Dissolving karma. Cultivating trust and faith in the unseen”

Take me to:

Karmic astrology

Book a private karmic astrology session now.

Soulmate Site Home