Remember a few weeks back when I made coconut cream pie french toast? Well, this recipe came from the same place of inspiration: while I was working out watching the Food Network. Apparently, it’s my zen place.

Tyler Florence was making a version of mashed potatoes I’d never seen before. He cooked the potatoes in whole milk and cream to produce the creamiest, must luxurious mashed potatoes I’d ever laid eyes on. Obviously, I can’t do dairy because it hates me. So I wanted to try a vegan version to see if it worked sans cream.

Turns out, if you cook potatoes in unsweetened plain almond milk, it really just makes them kind of mealy and they taste like almond milk. Yick. Back to the drawing board. NOW YOU KNOW.

Another few attempts at the best damn vegan mashers yielded massive success. It turns out, you don’t need to cook them in anything other than plain old water. It’s the type of potatoes and mix-ins that make all the difference.

These mashers require 6 simple ingredients:

Yukon gold potatoes

Vegan butter

Roasted garlic (hubba. hubba)

Sea Salt

Black Pepper

& Chives

The result is super creamy, luxurious mashed potatoes with a sweet garlic tone, plenty of S+P, and an herbaceous, light touch from the chives. Give me a spoon, I’m going in.

You will love these taters. They’re:

Thick

Fluffy

Creamy

Buttery

Airy light

Garlicky

Herbaceous

& Altogether satisfying

These mashed potatoes are perfection with a little additional vegan butter, salt, pepper and chives. But they would definitely stand up to and pair well with my 6-Ingredient Mushroom Gravy.

I also intended to make these into potato pancakes (inspired by the Inquiring Chef), but they just never made it that far. I literally ate half of them off of that spoon. OOPS. Sorry but not.

Enjoy!

4.7 from 35 reviews The Best Damn Vegan Mashed Potatoes Print Friendly Version Prep time 10 mins Cook time 30 mins Total time 40 mins 6-ingredient vegan mashed potatoes that are fluffy, creamy, buttery, and loaded with roasted garlic and chives. Perfect as is, with gravy, or with a giant scoop of vegan butter. Author: Minimalist Baker Recipe type: Side Cuisine: Vegan, Gluten Free Serves: ~4 Ingredients 6-8 medium yukon gold potatoes (if large, cut in half)*

1 1/2 tsp sea salt

1/2 tsp ground black pepper

5-6 cloves roasted garlic (or sub minced garlic sautéed for 3 minutes in olive oil)*

3-4 Tbsp vegan butter (such as Earth Balance), melted/softened

1/4 cup fresh chives for topping Instructions Place potatoes in a large saucepan or pot and cover with water. Bring to a light boil over medium-high heat, add 1 tsp of sea salt, cover and cook for 25-30 minutes or until very tender. They should effortlessly slide off a knife when pierced with a knife. While the potatoes are cooking, chop up your chives and measure your butter. Once tender, drain your potatoes and place them back in the hot pot off the heat for 1 minute to evaporate any additional water. Then transfer to a large mixing bowl. Mash your potatoes using either a potato masher or a hand mixer until fluffy. Note: Be careful using a hand mixer as you can overmix the potatoes and they can become gluey. It’s personally the method I prefer as I don’t own a potato masher. I just make sure not to overmix. Add in butter, garlic, salt, and black pepper and stir to combine. Taste and adjust seasonings as needed. Lastly top with chives, stir and serve as is or your favorite gravy (or mushroom gravy). Leftovers will keep in the fridge covered for up to a few days. Notes *Use organic potatoes if possible, especially since you leave the skin on.

*To roast a head of garlic, simply cup the top off to expose tips, rub with olive oil, wrap in foil and bake for 50 minutes – 1 hour in a 400-degree F (204 C) oven directly on the rack. Cloves should squeeze out easily once cooled. Discard skins/peel. Nutrition Information Serving size: 1/4 recipe Calories: 232 Fat: 8.4g Saturated fat: 2.7g Carbohydrates: 37g Sugar: 3g Sodium: 900mg Fiber: 6.2g Protein: 3.3g 3.5.3226