Good news: Pottery Barn just added new items to their small space collection, which debuted earlier this year. Check out some of the pieces below:

Loading Email Sign-Up Form... If the form doesn't load, you can try our mailing list page instead.

Back in January, the retailer announced a collection of space conscious, multifunctional pieces that represented a new market for a brand that can often be associated with spacious suburban living. And it's proving successful: What started out in just 15 stores is now expanding to 56 in "thoughtfully selected markets."

In addition to being of smaller scale, many of the items found a way to tackle the number one issue faced by small space dwellers: lack of storage. In fact, the brand's sleeper sofas and storage sofas were particularly well received.

"Our multifunctional SoMa Sofa Collection has become a customer favorite, so this season we've expanded our color and style options making the pieces even more customizable to fit any small space need," says Marta Benson, President, Pottery Barn. "We've also added three new styles to the SoMa family—the SoMa Reese and SoMa Roscoe for a more sophisticated space, and the slipcovered SoMa Katrina for a more comfortable, cozy look."

"Our customers also gravitate towards our organizational solutions—a key component of living efficiently in a smaller space," adds Benson. "A perfect example is our Antique Zinc Wall Organization System—the system is offered in multiple hanging designs, allowing customers to re-arrange as needed based on what they are organizing and the size of wall."

Pottery Barn mentioned that we can expect additional small space pieces with each season. "We plan to continue listening to our customers' needs, and are committed to launching innovative smaller, multi-functional pieces," Benson says.

"We want our customers to have a wide range of choices with reasonable price points when it comes to furnishing their space—no matter the square footage."

Check out the full small space collection over on Pottery Barn's website, or in 56 stores across the country.