At first glance, “The Playborhood” inspired in me nostalgia for times past, when children could play unsupervised and relatively safely somewhere down the block. But a thorough reading and a closer look at the pictures of Lanza’s carefully crafted backyard filled me with a skepticism bordering on horror.

Lanza is striking a nerve by describing a legitimate societal problem — a lack of unstructured play. But we need to think carefully about whether his proposed solutions, which vainly try to reincarnate the past in a changed world, are wise. Rather, parents and communities can engage in a dialogue about bolstering elements of a healthy childhood in ways that take into account modern realities. It’s an era when playing unsupervised in the street might not be safe anymore. But we can rediscover shared community spaces where parents can supervise children’s free play from a healthy distance, even shut off smartphones and enjoy one another’s company, and duck in with a hug and a Band-Aid as needed. I think that’s not so “uber” after all. Karen Littell, Santa Rosa, Calif.

Photo

RE: WEATHER

Michael Behar wrote about the National Weather Service, which employs technologies and methods that are woefully behind the times, and about Cliff Mass, its greatest critic.

Well done, Dr. Mass! But is it that most people have never heard of this issue, even an amateur “weather wienie” like myself? We assume that the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration is next to God, or something.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Accurate weather prediction affects each of us far more intimately and permanently than even, say, the presidential election — yet it gets little press and even less funding. But as a physician enduring the business model of medicine, I can’t help blaming government funding cuts more than the front-line meteorologists.

Throw the Hurricane Matthew debacle at Capitol Hill! A few supercomputers must cost way less than billions in disaster recovery! P. Marsh, M.D., posted on nytimes.com

Photo

Michael Behar’s article provides a stale narrative about the state of American weather forecasting. He ignores the major investment and effort underway to tackle these challenges.

The National Weather Service is in the midst of a technology revolution, bringing new satellites, supercomputers and upgraded models online to provide forecasts and warnings that are among the most accurate in the world. For example, hurricane forecasts have seen drastic improvements, as demonstrated by the accuracy of our Hurricane Matthew track and rainfall predictions.

The National Weather Service’s skilled and dedicated scientists work alongside public-safety officials to save lives by warning American and international communities in the path of extreme weather. Their work should be commended, not unfairly criticized. William M. Lapenta, director of NOAA’s National Centers for Environmental Prediction, College Park, Md.