Saturday morning brought a phone call from Battery Gardens, their Manhattan event space, offering to postpone their scheduled public wedding until the next day. But Ms. Schneider declined, she said, because “I was going to be dolled up, I’d have my husband there, I’d have my photographer there, and I was bringing my family.

Photo

“I was like, ‘We got this!’” she added. “I didn’t care.”

So they sent a text message to their 186 would-be guests: “Wedding still on! Please come if you can.”

The photographer, Sasithon Pooviriyakul, turned up as expected during the snowstorm. The bride’s hairdresser, Kerry-Lou Brehm, who lives in New Jersey, slept in her Manhattan salon on Friday night so she could make it Saturday morning. And David Gilman, a judicial hearing officer in the Bronx, signed on at the 11th hour to lead the Battery Gardens ceremony.

By the time they all walked in, the centerpieces were ready, the wedding canopy was almost up and the cupcake tower — complete with vanilla, chocolate, carrot cake and red velvet — had arrived from Long Island.

The bridesmaids and groomsmen also soon appeared, albeit in snow boots and heavy jackets, but only half the guests were able to make it.

“The people who didn’t show up were mostly from New Jersey, Long Island and Westchester,” Ms. Schneider said. “The people who were from farther away were more able to get there because they had flown in Thursday or Friday.”

“But this was our wedding,” said the bride, who stood bare-shouldered in the snow while Ms. Pooviriyakul snapped away. “It was more intimate than expected, and it made it even more special.”

Photo

The show also went on for Sarah Pous and Thomas Brown V, whose mid-blizzard wedding took place Saturday at the Brooklyn Winery.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

After the reception, the bride trekked through the snow in her floor-length wedding dress to get to the after-party down the street. And when the night wound down, with her furry snow boots poking out from beneath her gown, she traipsed to the L train.

“I certainly didn’t expect to take the subway home on my wedding night,” Ms. Brown said. “Everyone was asking, ‘Did you guys really just get married?’”

Although the wedding went ahead on Saturday, the couple’s hired officiant, Mirelle Eid, could not legally marry them that night; she married the couple at a Starbucks on the Upper West Side on Sunday.

After news of the travel bans circulated, other couples decided to postpone instead.

“We were determined to get married yesterday until the bridges and tunnels were officially closed,” Danielle Borovoy said in an email. Her Saturday marriage to Daniel Greenberg was moved instead to the next day. “The biggest challenges were spreading the word to all our guests as quickly as possible and coordinating logistics all over again for today.”

For Amanda Mott and Michael Gunn, South Carolina residents who had planned their destination wedding for Saturday at the Metropolitan Club in Manhattan, making a last-minute decision to postpone the ceremony and reception until the next day became an opportunity for the couple and their wedding party to let off some steam.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Of the Moment The lifestyle newsletter from the Styles, Travel and Food sections, offering the latest trends to news you can use. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Everybody was already done with their hair and makeup, and that’s when they announced that the wedding was off and that it’d be on Sunday,” said the bride’s mother, Charlotte Mott. Between the weather and the date change, their 207 guests, who were flying in from California, Alabama and the Carolinas, dwindled to roughly 140. But that didn’t dampen the mood.

Their photographer, Terry de Roy Gruber, had already shown up, camera in hand, at the Mandarin Oriental hotel, where the wedding party was prepping. “This was the first wedding I’ve done that was canceled because of a snow emergency, and it was kind of wonderful,” he said. “There was this amazing sense of relief once they made the decision. They were so giddy. Like: ‘Let’s go out and practice and have fantasy photos in the blizzard. I don’t care about my dress. I’m going to brave it and do it.’ Not very many brides in my experience have wanted to get their dresses wet and stand in 20-degree wintry weather.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Gruber said the train of the bride’s Heidi Elnora dress, covered in ostrich feathers, “looked remarkable against the snow. White on white.”

The weather changed the bride’s dark hair to match. “She was covered in snow,” her mother said. “And her hair was white.”

Mr. Gunn, the groom, said: “She’s always wanted a white wedding in New York. This is what she’s always dreamed of.”

Her mother added: “She loves the snow. She said, ‘Mommy, I know it’s going to snow on my wedding day.’ We all laughed and said, ‘Well, she prayed just a little too hard because she got a blizzard.’”

Read more: Off-Season Weddings Can Be Quirky Good Fun, or a Disaster

Some Wedding Sites Also Play Hard to Get

Continue following our fashion and lifestyle coverage on Facebook (Styles and Modern Love), Twitter (Styles, Fashion, and Vows), and Instagram.