Steady as she goes! You're coming down from quite an epic summer, Leo. Not only was there a rare doubleheader of new moons in your sign (on July 23 and August 21), the entire world, along with the Internet, lost its damn mind chasing the spectacular Leo total solar eclipse last month. Regardless of whether you donned your paper glasses to watch the moon shade the Sun or hunkered indoors like the Native Americans and the ancients who feared the eclipse's dramatic changes, no sign was more profoundly affected than yours. Its presence may or may not have made itself known yet, but this eclipse is ushering bold, breakout energy into your world. It's time to claim your crown in an even prouder way than ever!

Here's the thing: Eclipses (http://astrostyle.com/learn-astrology/solar-and-lunar-eclipses/) themselves aren't rare. There are actually four to six of them every year. But since this one was visible across a wide swath of the United States, we will now have to spend months with terms like "path of totality" ringing in our ears. (Overhyped or not, it was pretty awesome to witness!) And you, Leo, will be launched to greater heights of independence and courage, which your fierce sign is more than ready to do. Between now and the January 31 total lunar (full moon) eclipse in Leo, you're on your own path of totality, beaming your boldest, brightest ideas into the wider world. On top of that, energizer Mars has been visiting Leo from July 20 to September 5, ramping up the intensity and training all eyes on you. Don't worry about "eclipsing" other people with your major debuts. If you're sharing positive energy, the world will only benefit from your creativity.

Exciting as this cosmic commotion has been, the rush of activity has probably left you feeling all over the place. It's timely, then, that the Sun is sweeping through Virgo and your grounded, practical second house until September 22. Life will start to get a little more predictable. Take some of those grand visions and set them to a simple plan. Create a budget or schedule. Map out milestones and the steps you'll take to reach them. Reach out to experienced people for advice on where to begin. Get out of the dreaming phase and into the doing. It doesn't matter where you start. Just begin!

But make a concerted effort to pace yourself, Leo. Communication planet Mercury is retrograde from August 12 to September 5. For the bulk of its backspin, Mercury has been in Virgo, which created confusion around money, work and technology for you. Since August 31, Mercury has been backsliding through Leo, making you feel wildly misunderstood. You may have been bickering with everyone or on the outs with your usual supporters. Luckily, you'll only have to endure about a week of this madness. Mercury resumes direct (forward) motion on September 5, lingering in Leo until September 10.

The minute Mercury corrects course, go-getter Mars leaves your sign, bursting into Virgo and your productive second house from September 5 to October 22. School is in session—and "busy" is about to be an understatement when it comes to your schedule. Work pressure may ramp up, but so will the excitement. There could be demanding deadlines and long hours, but they should be worth the effort. If hustling boosts your bottom line or scores you a plum position, lean in. But don't waste your time making senseless sacrifices. Stop to evaluate the return on your investment. Will the sweat equity pay off?

A big turning point could arrive at this month's full moon, which falls in ethereal Pisces on September 6, illuminating your eighth house of intimacy, shared wealth and joint ventures. Since full moons mark transitions, you may need to decide which direction to take with a key relationship. Should you stay or should you go? In love, you might decide to make a permanent move: marriage, pregnancy, buying real estate. Sizzling sexual chemistry can ignite. Or things could go in the complete opposite direction as you officially part ways.

A full moon in this psychologically intense house will bring up a groundswell of buried emotions—perhaps even a visit from the emerald-eyed monster. Before you throw jealous accusations, spend some time getting clear on what's going on within. Reflect, don't deflect! If you're feeling distrustful, don't assume it's because the other person is "making" you feel that way. It could be an old wound being triggered. Talk it through, perhaps with a confidante or therapist, to process whatever's coming up.

Since the eighth house rules wealth, a financial windfall could be on its way, as the eighth house rules large lump sums, often ones that come through bonuses, royalties, inheritances and such. You might decide to pay off debt or get news about an investment. This full moon is the culmination of events sparked at the February 26 Pisces new moon, which was also a galvanizing solar eclipse. Whatever comes together now is likely to be major!

What does all of this mean? You could get a clearer sense within two weeks, and you should feel ready to start taking concrete steps. On September 20, the Virgo new moon arrives, turning a clean page around money, work and daily routines. Prioritizing gets a whole lot easier. Whether you're starting a fall fitness regimen or finalizing your schedule, this productive lunation helps you get a handle on your plans.

The key here is to simplify—and not take on too much! This new moon will form an awkward 150-degree angle, called a quincunx , to disruptive Uranus in your excessive ninth house. While la luna pushes for security, Uranus tempts you to take a wild risk. While playing it TOO safe can cause you to miss an opportunity, you don't want to risk your hard-won stability. Try your best to strike a balance.

The pace picks up on September 22, when the Sun enters Libra and your social third house, giving you the urge to brainstorm, experiment and find kindred spirits. Exciting synergies could crop up both online and in person. This is your cue to get out and circulate! With el Sol warming up your third house of local action, you'll want to make the rounds of fall gatherings. Be open to meeting new people, and have your "elevator speech" ready. You'll be especially captivating now—and likely to meet people who can open doors or make helpful intros. You might very well play superconnector yourself, hooking up friends and earning some karmic brownie points. If you need to clear up any post-retrograde misunderstandings, this is a favorable time.

But before you start airing and sharing, apply a few filters, Leo. On September 28, outspoken Jupiter will lock into its third and final opposition with shock jock Uranus in your unbridled ninth house. Jupiter and Uranus are two of astrology's most freedom-loving planets, and they're battling for attention. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could surface for a grand finale.

All year long, these two planets have been teaching you the importance of timing when it comes to expressing yourself. Your passionate sign isn't famous for self-censorship, but outbursts or unedited blurts haven't won you any fans. The goal of communication, after all, is to connect with people, not to alienate them or burn a bridge. If you have an irrepressible need to voice your truth, know that you might leave a few jaws on the floor. There's a difference between "just being honest" and being rude or inappropriate. That line could get easily blurred now. Since Uranus rules technology, mind your message on social media too. An edgy "joke" could be misinterpreted, landing you in hot water. (The Internet has a long memory, even if you delete fast!) Be careful what you put in writing or email today. When in doubt, save to "drafts" or just don't go there.

At this final curveball, you could hear news that changes the course of your plans. Expect the unexpected—and embrace change if it arrives. Watch your own volatility and rash moves. There's a tendency to pursue independence at all costs and shake things up with unnecessary vigor. Sweeping changes could be more disruptive than you think. Aim for gradual and calculated moves, even if it goes against your urge to do something radical.

Steadying the course is powerful Pluto, which ends a five-month retrograde that same day (September 28) in your sixth house of organization and wellness. Since April, your attempts to keep a consistent routine may have been met with undermining disruptions. From a rebellious employee to an overbooked schedule filled with stress, it's been hard to put yourself first. But since Pluto is a karmic mirror, ask yourself: What am I avoiding by keeping these challenges in my life?