Ever woken up, looked in the mirror and felt as though there was a ZOMBIE staring back at you?

Me too!!!

It’s exactly on these days that I need my makeup skills the most!

If we haven’t met before, I’m Katie – Professional Makeup Artist and Founder of BeautyandtheBoutique.com. And today I’m going to show you how I ‘cheat’ a fresh-faced glow in the mornings!

Have you ALWAYS wanted to learn the inside tips and tricks, while discovering the products makeup artists can’t live without?

Follow the easy steps in the video and transform your complexion from tired and washed out to sparkling and ALERT!

We’re delivering FREE worldwide TODAY!

Testimonials from my Facebook community

Here’s a recap of my video…

Looking fresh-faced AND glowing is a breeze when you know HOW!

Imagine owning just FIVE products in your makeup bag that in a few simple steps helps you look like YOU but only more rested, fresh-faced and youthful!

Here’s how to get the look

Prepping, priming AND protecting your skin is an essential step. I’m sharing with you the cream I have used every single morning for the last 18 months; Heliocare 360 – and it’s going to rock your world and your skin!

Why I LOVE Heliocare 360

Heliocare 360 helps block your skin from sun ageing (and sun damage) with powerful age-fighting antioxidants. PLUS, it evens out skin tone and leaves your skin perfectly primed ready for makeup application.

It’s gentle enough for the most sensitive skin and I thank the creators of Heliocare for helping me future proof my skin from harmful UV and environmental ageing! If you’re serious about holding off the years, then you need Heliocare 360 in your life daily.

I apply about a thumbnail size to my face and eyes, then the same amount to my neck. I massage it into my skin and wait a few minutes for the cream to soak in before applying my makeup.

I’ve used this since my thirties; I’m forty now and I LOVE how it’s helped keep my skin age slower.

Veil Complexion Fix is my best ‘cheat’ to a great look complexion (when I don’t want to or don’t have the time to apply a full face of foundation) in the mornings.

It’s great for when you want your skin to breathe, or hate the thought of wearing foundation. It helps give the look of skin that’s just had a months worth of facials. I love to use this instead of foundation on ‘natural’ days and keep it in my purse for whenever I’m feeling drab!

Why I LOVE Veil Complexion Fix

The magic of VEIL is that it allows your natural skin to show through, while adding a skin-care infused sheer (yet buildable) coverage that perfects your complexion! Veil quickly covers redness, uneven skin tone, dark circles and softens the look of large pores. It’s YOUR skin, only younger looking!

Veil Complexion Fix is a quick and natural looking solution to brighten your complexion and an alternative to heavy looking foundation.

Alternatively, if you’ve always wanted to achieve an airbrushed look to your skin, apply your regular foundation /concealer, then apply Veil Complexion Fix over the top (in the areas shown above) for the BEST complexion of your life!

If you want more coverage, apply once and leave to set for 40 seconds (it sets itself so no need for powder on top!) and then tap on additional layers.

Apply to the areas as shown above and blend out with your fingers.

Not had the time or money to have years worth of facials? Me neither. This is how I cheat my skin to looking glowy and luminous!

This Watercolour™ Liquid Blush in shade ‘Glow’ adds a very subtle pretty hue to the cheeks, eyes and lips.

Why I LOVE Glow Watercolour™ Liquid Blush

Glow Watercolour™ Liquid Blush is radiant, youthful looking skin – in a bottle!

This genius formula allows your skin to peep through, meaning your skin looks like YOURS only much more radiant. It works perfectly on bare skin or over foundation – the choice is yours.

Glow contains hundreds of thousands of light reflecting particles that reflect light and bounce off your complexion, to give you the most stunning yet completely natural looking healthy glow! It features a delicate hue of colour that adds just a touch of warmth to the skin, without looking ‘obvious’ and ‘overdone’.

Take a look at the swatch I applied to my hand and how ‘Glow’ catches the light! Imagine how stunning this will look on the cheekbone, eye and lips!

Ever had the problem with your mascara smudging and transferring onto your under eye or brow bone? NOT a good look!

This Blinc Amplified Mascara is completely smudge proof! If you like your lashes to look naturally defined and pretty (and never thick or cakey! Then you’ll fall in LOVE with this natural looking mascara.

Why I LOVE Blinc mascara

This mascara won’t run or smudge even if you kick up a sweat or have oily skin.

This revolutionary Blinc Amplified Mascara places a fine tube around each eyelash and once it’s on, it isn’t going to budge. Plus, it looks really pretty and natural; like your lashes – only BETTER!

Place the wand at the base of the lashes as close to the root as possible, and wiggle the brush back and forth in a zig-zag motion. Then lift the brush upwards to coat the lengths of the lashes. For a very natural looking lash apply one coat, and for more definition apply additional layers.

I LOVE that it’s 24hr smudge proof! RESULT!!

The finishing touch to a fresh-faced, youthful glow is this Daniel Sandler Watercolour™ Liquid Blush in Shade ‘Flush’! It sits perfectly over Daniel Sandler Watercolour™ Liquid Blush in ‘Glow’ to add an instant POP of ‘colour’ to cheeks and lips!

Why I LOVE Flush Watercolour™ Liquid Blush

This blush looks beautiful on every skin tone!

I’ve selected this shade because this pink, when applied over ‘Glow’ to just the apples of the cheeks and on the lips, will transform your complexion from beautiful to AH-MAZING!

Here’s where I like to apply ‘Flush’, layering it over the top of ‘Glow’.

Testimonials from my Facebook community

I hope I’ve helped you feel more fresh and pretty in the mornings! Thank you so much for watching!

Love

Makeup Artist | Stylist | Founder of Beautyandtheboutique.com