Paging: Housekeeping! After the whirlwind of eclipses, retrogrades and cosmic curveballs that colored this August, your life might feel like a hotel suite after a touring rock band checks out. Granted, you might have thrown a few of those ragers yourself, Aries. But now, with the Sun in efficient Virgo and your orderly, health-conscious sixth house until September 22, you're ready to clean up and put things back in their place.

Let's chew on the idea of "place" first, though. Last month's two eclipses made an interesting remix of your friendships, love affairs and creative aspirations. You had epiphanies about how you want to be seen in the world, and September's stars can help you deftly apply those eye-opening insights. Why rush back to "normalcy" just because you feel a little anxious? Slow down and let yourself adjust to any reality shifts.

Your best bet? Map out a strategic plan instead of springing impulsively into action. Virgo season is ideal for behind-the-scenes strategizing and simplifying. This year, you get an extra burst of motivation from Mars, which is also blazing through Virgo from September 5 to October 22. Like a ginger shot in your cold-pressed juice, the red planet ramps up fall fitness plans or could inspire a decluttering spree. Grab a few contractor’s bags and filer tubs, then get busy sorting and systematizing.

With almost three-quarters of the year behind you, it's a great time to purge and put what remains in its place. Evaluate which projects still merit your attention—or at least whittle the list down to one or two that you'll focus on. Spreading yourself among too many ventures will only lead to shoddy work and exhaustion. Take your time, Aries.

Another reason to corral the chaos? Communication planet Mercury has been retrograde since August 12, a signal-scrambling cycle that ends on September 5. Mercury spent most of its about-face in Virgo and your efficient sixth house, making it extra challenging to stay on top of details. Stress levels spiked, and now, with Mercury backing into Leo and your theatrical fifth house from August 31 to September 10, drama could flare. An ex could resurface early, or you could find yourself in the midst of an embarrassing public meltdown at a party or online. Keep your wits about you, Aries, and avoid engaging with the ego-trippers.

Better to just let it go and let it flow. You'll get a cosmic assist in assuming this surrendered post at the September 6 full moon in Pisces, which illuminates your twelfth house of healing, closure and release. This is like a double dose of transitional energy: Full moons also symbolize endings, and this one particularly emphasizes completion. Spiritual epiphanies could also abound. If you've been holding your feelings back or avoiding a difficult situation, this lunar light can snap you out of denial. The emotional floodgates are opening—ready or not. Have yourself a good, cleansing cry or drive out to a deserted spot to unleash a primal scream. Your intuition is dialed up high; pay attention to any strong gut feelings or "signs" you may get. Someone's true colors could be revealed at this full moon. Have you trusted too readily? Observe quietly and don't jump to conclusions, but note any behavior that seems off to you.

After a few weeks of polishing and perfecting, the September 20 Virgo new moon presents the right moment to launch into any new undertakings or unveil your master plan. But don't forget to add your individual stamp! The new moon will form an exact quincunx to radical Uranus, which is retrograde in Aries. This jarring angle means la luna and shock jock Uranus are at uncomfortable odds and may require you to negotiate between two contrasting energies. One side of you wants order and perfection, while another prefers to be messy and free! Just as you craft the perfect schedule and project- management system for yourself, your rebellious side could make a dramatic appearance, toppling those carefully laid action steps. Build in some flexibility and breathing room, or you'll make yourself (and everyone else you’ve lined up) crazy. You're an Aries—and even if you’re changing your tune to be more efficient, "spontaneous" IS your middle name!

Partnerships take center stage on September 22, when the Sun begins its annual visit to Libra and your seventh house of committed relationships. Teaming up for love, business or a creative collab gets some extra solar power. While you're normally the poster child for independence, this month finds you willing to trade a little autonomy for extra support. Libra is your opposite sign, so when the Sun visits here, it's at its farthest distance from your sign on the zodiac wheel. It can feel a bit like a winter of the soul, a time when you need to conserve your life force energy. You just don't have the steam to do it all by yourself—so why not reach out for help?

You won't go willingly into any binding twosomes at month's end. On September 28, expansive Jupiter in Libra makes its third and final opposition to liberated Uranus in Aries. You may be tempted to make a swift and reactionary exit from a partnership that's gotten too close for comfort. Or maybe you'll dive all the way in without looking twice, only to wake up with an acute case of buyer's remorse. This is a day when you want to avoid throwing the baby out with the bathwater. Tempted as you are to make sweeping changes, the relief you feel may not last long before panic sets in and you’re left asking, "What have I done?"

Jupiter and Uranus are two of astrology's most freedom-loving planets, and they're both battling for attention. Your fear of "losing yourself" in a relationship could get provoked by this harsh aspect. Take a cool-headed step back if you can. Maybe you just need to carve out more space for yourself within the confines of a commitment so you don't feel suppressed. These two heavenly heavyweights only oppose each other every 14 years; their last two face-offs were on December 26, 2016, and March 3, 2017. Look back to those dates for clues of what could surface for a grand finale now.

Also on September 28, controlling Pluto ends a five-month retrograde in Capricorn and your tenth house of career, long-term goals and structure. If you've struggled to toe the line since April or felt majorly conflicted about your path, Pluto’s course correction can help the soul-searching process. Stalled ambitions could pick up steam. If you've had unspoken tension with a boss, client or employee, it’s time to address it. But be strategic; crafty Pluto turns everything into a Game of Thrones, and you want to plot your moves with proper foresight.