“Design thinking is useful for when we need a paradigm shift, for instance when something is fundamentally broken about a service,” said Thomas Fisher, one of the authors of the report and the director of the Minnesota Design Center at the University of Minnesota. “It allows for the creative, multidisciplinary thinking around solving the issue.”

At Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia, where Dr. Bon Ku serves as director of the Jefferson Health Design Lab, medical students, nurses, doctors and other hospital personnel are given the freedom to design, manufacture and prototype their ideas, which they can then present back to the hospital. One of the innovations the lab has fostered is a new pediatric pain scoring system called CareCube.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Normally, patients are asked to rate their pain on a score of 1 to 10. But health care workers at the university recognized that a toylike object could be at once both more inviting and more effective for children. Each of the six sides of the cube has a facial expression, such as a frown or a grimace, that corresponds to established pain scores. When asked about their pain levels, children in the hospital can simply take the cube and point to a face, which helps the nurse decide if their pain is being managed well.

This year, Dr. Ku, an emergency medicine doctor, and his colleagues introduced a course that pairs medical students with architecture students. The group is using design thinking to develop a digital mapping tool that uses GPS-like software to understand how patients, doctors and nurses move about and interact in the emergency room, with the aim of improving communication and decreasing wait times.

A design thinking approach was used by a group of researchers at McGill University in Montreal, who found that the closer a sink was to a patient with Clostridium difficile, a hard to treat and highly contagious hospital infection, the more likely hospital workers were to wash their hands after seeing the patient. The lead author of that study, Dr. Yves Longtin, says that to improve hand-washing rates, most clinical care at their hospital has been moved to a newer part of the building, where sinks are installed within plain sight.

Health care workers may also invite patients to the health innovation table. At the University of Michigan, Dr. Joyce Lee, a designer turned physician, is a co-leader of an interdisciplinary collaborative called Health Design By Us. The group supported a patient-designed mobile system for diabetes management that grew out of the work of one young patient’s father who was looking for easier ways to monitor and report his child’s glucose levels. The system, called Nightscout, attaches to the patient’s glucose monitor and transmits digital readings to the cloud, where they can be easily accessed through a phone, tablet or smartwatch to ultimately guide clinical decisions in real time.

Online communities that support innovation are also springing up. Dr. Diana Anderson, an architect who went on to get a medical degree, was a co-founder in 2016 of Clinicians for Design, an international network of health care providers. The group offers online discussions as well as workshops and digital resources, with a focus on improving health care delivery and the hospital’s physical layout.

When I think of something as basic as a bright orange vest, it amazes me that such a simple and inexpensive idea from an experienced nurse could lead to improvements in how real trauma cases are handled. By fostering simple innovations through design thinking in hospitals, we can tackle many challenges in the hospital in new ways, saving both dollars and lives.