After that fresh-faced glow? Yeah, us too. Back in middle school (when, like, every teenager already had this fresh-faced glow) we discovered makeup (eek!) and took quite a heavy hand to the sparkly stuff. However, we soon discovered that glitter does not a youthful complexion make. Thankfully, today’s products match our more subdued sensibilities, and you can fake your way to a brighter face without all the glitter of our tween days. The dewy look is hard to master without starting with the skin, so we’ve rounded up 18 beauty products (from face sprays to gel blushes) that’ll have you shimmering and sparkling au natural. Well, sort of.

1. Mario Badescu Facial Spray with Aloe, Herbs and Rosewater ($7): This soothing. budget-friendly face spray smells like a garden even though it includes something called bladderwrack extract. We don’t even wanna know… actually, we do… it’s a kind of seaweed. Phew. (via Life, Set Sail)

2. Clarisonic Pro for Face and Body ($225): Exfoliation is key! We’re definitely in the Clarisonic fan club and we love the Pro in particular because it can be used all over that hot bod of yours.

3. Dermalogica Daily Microfoliant ($41): Dermalogica’s Microfoliant is our favorite gentle facial exfoliator. As much as we love our Clarisonic, sometimes we prefer scrubbing the ol’ fashioned way with this stuff instead.

4. Burt’s Bee’s Radiance Body Lotion ($9): Nourishing Royal Jelly, aloe and a little mica mineral for shimmer have us reaching for this lotion when we’re getting ready to bare some skin.

5. One Love Organics Active Moisture Time Release Vitamin D Moisture Mist ($39): We love just about everything in this line of products, not the least of which is this refreshing, firming, wrinkle-fighting face spray.

6. Clinique Moisture Surge Extended Thirst Relief ($50): The texture of this moisturizer is crazy-sexy-cool — “cool” being the operative word. It feels like cucumber jelly for your face. Ditch those little yellow free gift Clinique moisturizers and upgrade to this one.

7. Rodin Olio Lusso ($116): If you’re gonna spend loads of money, at least spend it on your skin. If the eyes are the windows to the soul, your skin is the vinyl siding and you gots’ta take care of it. This luxurious face oil is a splurge, but it delivers on dewiness.

8. Tarte Amazonian Clay BB Illuminating Moisturizer ($32): BB cream can often backfire when it comes to dewiness, leaving you with a heavier, more matte coverage than you need or want. This illuminating product will keep it light — literally.

9. Bareskin Pure Brightening Serum Foundation ($29): We’ve been curious about bareMinerals’ new liquid products since they debuted, and their brightening foundation is first on our list. Summer glow in a bottle? We hope. (via Bond Girl Glam)

10. Josie Maran Coconut Watercolor Cheek Gelee ($22): These build-able, natural colors in cheek-drenching bright shades like Poppy Paradise and Getaway Red will make any girl blush.

11. NARS The Multiple in Orgasm ($39): NARS cult-favorite blush shade is available in a cream stick, which is perfect for quick finger applications on cheeks, lips and eyes. The shimmery finish is illuminating.

12. Watt’s Up Soft Focus Highlighter ($40): We’re gonna share a few of our favorite highlighters in this post, starting with this one. (via The Notice)

13. RMS Beauty Living Luminizer ($38): Celebrity makeup artist Rose-Marie Swift is responsible for this near-perfect natural highlighter that will not make you look like a disco ball.

14. bareMinerals Stroke of Light Eye Brightener ($22): This dual product is a concealer and an eye brightener in one!

15. NYX Cosmetics Long-Lasting Makeup Spray in Dewy Finish ($7): This makeup setting spray is a must for hot summer days when you don’t want your face to melt off. So… everyday. (via Lucy Sparkle Beauty)

16. Josie Maran Infinity Lip and Cheek Creamy Oil ($18): Argan oil is the star of Josie Maran’s whole line, and this creamy blusher and lip color is no different. It brightens up your cheeks instantly.

17. Korres Mandarin Lip Butter ($12): Lip butters are perfect for summer — just a hint of color + lots of moisturizing shea butter and Mandarin oil. This one also comes with SPF 15!

18. Avène Thermal Spring Water Spray ($12): It’s French, so you know it’s good. Refresh yo’self on the hour every hour and you’ll always have that dewy look… because of the actual dew you are spraying on your face.

And then, dear friends… you shall look like this:

(via Studded Hearts)

Have any other beauty secrets to spill? Let us know in the comments!

Get Fashion Inspo Sent to Your Inbox Every Thursday Subscribe YAS! You're going to receive the looks that slay. For now, check out the latest fashion trends Must be a valid email address! Terms & Privacy