I (and several other people) pretty much answered this question a few weeks ago here:But let's look at it from another angle. What you're really saying is, "Why does anybody bother to paint anymore when photographs are so much better?" After all, if the goal of art is to provide as much detail and realism as possible, it can't compete with a photograph, can it? But then I have to ask you in return, if photorealistic detail is so important to you, why do you like painting? There must be something about a painting that is lacking in a photograph. Is it the mere fact that the artist did it by hand? Or could there possibly be a philosophical dimension to a painting that is lacking in a photograph?The first thing to note is that the "hand-made" aspect of photorealistic painting is a bit of a stretch to begin with. You could probably program a computer/plotter combination to duplicate a photograph as an exercise pointilism, and the result will be very close to a human-made photorealist painting. Back in the day, before there were inkjet plotters there were pen plotters. The paper was held on a roller which rolled back and forth as the pen moved back and forth along a track, creating lines and curves. It would be relatively simple to modify one of those old plotters to create "art" in a manner that simulates the photorealist technique.But I'll go further than that. The human eye, mind and hand is intrinsically superior to a photograph. Can a camera focus on the foreground and background simultaneously, while leaving the middle ground out of focus? It cannot. Can the camera omit unwanted visual elements like an artist can? Again, no. Can it alter the location of visual elements to create a better formal composition? Nope. These are all essential tasks the artist performs with ease but which require hours of preliminary work by the photographer, or the photorealist painter, to achieve.Here's the workflow of these two approaches:REPRESENTATIONAL ARTIST1. Look at the landscape.2. Paint the landscape.PHOTOREALIST ARTIST1. Look at the landscape.2. Take a photograph of the landscape.3. Download the photograph to your computer (in the old days, have the photograph developed and mounted in a slide jacket).4. Edit the landscape in Photoshop, if necessary.5. Project the edited landscape onto a canvas.6. Paint the landscape.Again, you might end up with the detail and realism you're looking for, but from my viewpoint, why bother? If that's all that matters, stick with the photo. And if the human intercession in the creation of the image is important, why put five additional steps in between the direct experience of nature and the finished image?There are two more things to mention about the superiority of traditional representation over photorealism. One is that the artist is far more capable of reproducing the actual way we experience reality than the camera does. Have you ever noticed how things become distorted near the edges of wide angle photographs? That's because the human eye is capable of taking in about 114 degrees of stereo vision. The normal 35 mm camera takes in about 40. Changing the focal length to bring in a wider view distorts the image and causes the sensation of realism you find so important to degrade. Furthermore, the human visual system does not operate by looking at one focus and taking a "snapshot." The eye operates by a series of swift motions, called, focusing upon different parts of a view, which are then knit together in the visual centers of the brain. This is very, very different from how a camera operates.Now look at this 19th century photograph:Look at the intensity of that stare, the almost creepy depth of his gaze. A lot of early portrait photographs look like--because the film technology of the time obliged the sitter to remain motionless for several seconds, if not minutes, in order to achieve a proper exposure. Photographers often used neck braces to keep their subjects still. The portrait is so intense because, rather than capturing a split second in the subject's life, like today's portraits, it captures several minutes. A paintinginvolves a far larger commitment in time from the artist and the model. The psychological intensity is greater because the artist's involvement is greater.Sometimes old ways, are the best ways. I'll end with a couple of my own paintings, painted from life, because why not? The first is a self portrait, the second a recent landscape.Are they super-detailed and realistic? I guess not. Are they beautiful? I hope so.