Abraham Lacalle, whose work has been shown at the Reina Sofía Museum here, painted what he called a truck’s “explosion,” inspired by thoughts of what could happen to the merchandise transported inside.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Two years after completing his painting, Mr. Lacalle said in a phone interview that it was strange to see how trucks and vans had more recently also become associated with terrorism, after attacks in Nice, Berlin, London and, earlier this month, Barcelona.

“I painted with some sense of humor, imagining what could happen to the content of a truck in movement,” he said. “Nobody was then thinking about trucks as a tool of terrorism, so a work that was meant to be fun could now unintentionally appear pretty provocative.”

Photo

The most recent truck was painted by Nuria Mora, whose street art has been included in a show at the Tate Modern in London. Her truck sports a brightly colored geometric abstraction that she described as “a game of balance and tension.”

The truck project was born when Mr. Colsa commissioned an artist, Okuda San Miguel, to paint a mural in 2013 on a warehouse for his company, Palibex, on the outskirts of Madrid. When it was done, Mr. Colsa told Mr. San Miguel that “it was a real shame to have this great work on a warehouse that so few people then get to see it.”

The conversation shifted to whether the painting could have been done on a vehicle rather than a wall. So far, Mr. Colsa has spent about €300,000, or around $327,000, on the truck project, which is overseen by two curators, Fer Francés and Óscar Sanz.

In some ways, Mr. Sanz said, the project was “a wink to 30 years ago,” when artists were decorating “the trains and trucks of New York.” Some of those artists have become more established and also more used to painting on larger areas, like murals on buildings. But painting a truck is different.

Photo

“Movement makes it something of a fleeting vision,” he said. And, he added, since many of the artists chosen used to tag trucks or subway cars (or had peers who did), they “enjoyed the challenge of returning to where their kind of art started.”

At first, Mr. Colsa said, the response was mixed, both from his drivers and some of his customers. One driver, he said, complained to management, because he believed that his truck had been vandalized and splashed with “horrible paint.” Attitudes, however, have changed.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Some of the truckers “couldn’t understand what kind of idiotic thing had been painted on their truck,” Mr. Colsa said. “But they now see that people really watch them drive past and often photograph their truck, so they’re delighted.”

As the project has grown, more artists have been drawn to it, to the point that Mr. Colsa said he now has a waiting list of artists. Many of them, he said, were drawn to the project because of their interest in the unusual interaction between the artwork and the viewers.