She added: “My sister Savannah is an awesome dancer. She helped me with the choreo and made it more fun.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The floor exercise is not even DeJesus’s best event; she was an all-American on bars, and she has made only limited floor appearances over her U.C.L.A. career. Saturday’s performance, which was widely shared on social media, was her first floor exercise of the season.

It was a good day in general for the U.C.L.A. team, currently ranked in the top 10 in N.C.A.A. Division I, as it beat its Pacific-12 rival, No. 7 Utah, by only 0.025 of a point.

Unsurprisingly, DeJesus, a 21-year-old sociology major from Temecula, Calif., has a dance and acting background. At 12, she performed on the TV show “Hip Hop Harry.” “He was like Barney, but a hip-hop bear,” DeJesus said. “We’d teach kids about the importance of drinking water, and stuff like that.”

When dancing on the show, DeJesus said, she would throw in some gymnastics moves.

DeJesus’s score for Saturday’s routine, a 9.925, tied for third on her team at the meet, trailing two excellent — if less popular online — performances and raising the question of how much colorful moves help or hinder scoring from traditional judges.

Photo

Dance moves in the floor exercises are often overlooked. “Commentators mostly talk about tumbling because it seems to be more impressive to an audience and it’s easier to spot the deductions in landings, height and form,” said Samantha Peszek, an Olympic silver medalist and a former U.C.L.A. teammate of DeJesus’s.

DeJesus’s innovation may not lead to perfect 10s, but “it is a subjective sport with human judges, so it doesn’t hurt,” Peszek said.

“The great thing about routines like Sophina’s is that they bring energy and life not only to the audience, but the rest of the team watching,” she added.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Would such crowd-pleasing moves actually hurt with more conservative judges? “The only time dance choreography would hurt a score is if it was inappropriate or if they considered it sloppy,” Peszek said. “But most of the time if the entertainment value is in a floor routine, it can only help their score.”

So at the Olympic Games this summer in Rio de Janeiro, will we see Danes doing the Dougie and Serbs doing the Stanky Leg?

Probably not, Peszek said.

“There are way more requirements to an Olympic-level routine in terms of tumbling and leap elements, so there wouldn’t be enough time to do as elaborate choreography as Sophina,” she said. “Also, international judges seem to appreciate more traditional style of floor choreography, so a floor routine like this would not score as well as it does in collegiate competition.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The era of gymnastics nae nae is probably not over, though. DeJesus said that if she were selected for future meets, she planned to continue doing her routine.