Get Your Pencils Ready, This Is A Quiz!

What do you get when you pair a sweet Nashville-raised gal with a classically trained chef who grew up in the Mediterranean? Why, the husband/wife team behind the new book, Mediterranean Paleo Cooking, of course! Caitlin, who is a nutritionist, and her husband Nabil are kindly sharing one of the mouthwatering recipes from their book with us today. Thanks, y’all!

Easy Paleo Falafel

This easy dish, which tastes like a hush puppy with the added flavor cumin and parsley, is a favorite of both kids and adults. The tahini dipping sauce is a wonderful sesame paste that is high in magnesium and calcium. If someone in your family is following a Gaps diet this recipe will work. Vegetarians will also enjoy this as an appetizer or a main dish.

Print Easy Paleo Falafel Prep 10 mins Cook 10 mins Total 20 mins Author Mommypotamus Yield 4 (makes 12 balls) Ingredients 1 medium head cauliflower

2 eggs, beaten

1/2 cup almond flour

Sea salt and pepper to taste

2 Tbsp parsley, minced

2 tsp cumin

1.5 cups sustainable palm shortening or coconut oil Instructions Cut the cauliflower into florets. Chop the cauliflower in the food processor until it is fine. Steam the cauliflower until al dente. Squeeze the cauliflower in a clean towel to get rid of the excess water. Place the cauliflower in a bowl then add the eggs, almond flour, salt, pepper, parsley and cumin. Heat up the oil in the frying pan over medium high heat. Form the dough into 2-inch balls and carefully drop them into the hot fat. Cook the falafel balls for two minutes then flip them with a slotted spoon. Remove the balls and let them rest on a paper towel for two minutes. Serve with tahini dipping sauce below

Yum

Tahini Dipping Sauce

Prep time 2 minutes

Print Easy Paleo Falafel Author Mommypotamus Yield 2 Ingredients 1/2 cup tahini (sesame seed paste)

1/2 cup water

Salt and pepper to taste

2 Tbsp apple cider vinegar or lemon juice

2 tsp garlic powder Instructions Whisk all the ingredients together and use as a dip or salad dressing.

Yum

About Paleo Mediterranean Recipes

Here’s the story behind the book in Caitlin’s words:

My husband and I have been working for months to tweak his traditional Mediterranean recipes to be grain free to fit a Paleo template. My husband is a classically trained chef and who grew up on the shores of the Mediterranean sea eating sardines. His family of 11 even harvested their own animals in the kitchen!

Earlier this year we visited his home country of Algeria which brought the recipes to life for me. Algeria is was a French colony for 130 years so their cuisine has many of the European influences. Our book also features 18 desserts free of refined sugar such as pistachio chocolate squares and Almond crescent cookies. As a holistic nutritionist it was important to me that these recipes be as nutrient dense as possible so we included 8 tasty offal preparations. We sincerely hope you enjoy this culinary vacation from the ordinary in our new book!