Consider the images with this article. Selected because they were not (with the exception of Ms. Dello Russo’s) outré expressly to snare eyeballs, the get-ups would be relatively plausible in nonprofessional settings. The point, though, is not that these women look lovely, stylish and better groomed than show ponies. It is that they are dressed for their followers.

Much as it may appear as if they are caught effortlessly darting from one show to the next, they are in fact hard at work pleasing an online audience that, in the case of the socialite Olivia Palermo, numbers 4.1 million on Instagram alone.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Giovanna Engelbert, the W magazine contributor with an assured style notable for unexpected pairings (she is seen here on her way to a Rochas show in Paris clad in a crocheted leather dress of her sister’s design) can boast of more than half a million followers on Instagram.

Pandora Sykes, the fashion features editor at The Sunday Times in London, has 112,000 Instagram fans. Such is the influence of the “Wardrobe Mistress” columnist that you can be certain that when she shows up for a London fashion show wearing an $830 puff-sleeved marigold dress from the London designer Rejina Pyo’s spring 2017 season, virtual registers go ka-ching.

Street-style trends once emerged at fashion shows. And photographers like Bill Cunningham of The New York Times or Scott Schuman of The Sartorialist, with their canny eyes and sharp journalistic instincts, homed in on them.

“Eight or nine years ago, when the Japanese photographers would swarm around me at the Milan Fiera, I laughed and thought it was funny,” said J. J. Martin, editor at large of Wallpaper magazine, referring to the setting of many Milan trade shows. “Now the whole mob scene just seems a little absurd.”

Conceding that attention garnered by the brightly patterned outfits she wears has probably helped her business (in addition to her journalistic duties, she created the niche clothing line LaDouble J), Ms. Martin still dresses for the shows “the same way I dress for the office,” she said.

She doesn’t borrow clothes for fashion week, she said, or otherwise treat fashion’s version of the wildebeest migration as a cross-platform merchandising opportunity.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I still dress to enjoy myself,” she said. Imagine that.