Like Us On Facebook

Like Us On Facebook

I consider myself one of the luckiest people in the world.

Why? Because I was born on December 5, causing me to fall under the sign of the Sagittarius.

If you were born from November 22 to December 21, then you can consider yourself lucky, too.

Numerous astrologers agree the sign of the centaur archer is one of the best zodiac signs one can be.

In ancient Roman mythology, centaurs were considered truth-seeking intellectuals.

The natural instinct of a Sagittarius is to wander in search for the answers to the greater questions in life.

Sagittarians often have positive impacts on the lives of those around them.

We make amazing friends and even better romantic partners.

Life is never boring with a Sagittarius, as we are the most active sign of the zodiac chart.

Our easygoing, adventurous nature makes us both great lovers and great companions.

While it may be difficult for us to commit to a relationship at first due to our love for freedom, when we do, we give it our all.

Our never-ending passion and youthful energy causes us to be amazing significant others.

Here are 10 reasons why you should date a Sagittarius:

1. They have adventurous desires.

Because Sagittarians are naturally curious wanderers, they are constantly going on excursions and adventures to explore everything life has to offer.

As energetic fire signs, they are filled with endless energy.

Their adventurous nature causes them to get off the couch, go out and do things.

They motivate others to join them on these adventures, as Sagittarians hate to experience things alone.

When dating a Sag, you will find yourself always trying new things and enjoying the world around you, as there is never a dull moment.

2. They are compassionate.

Sagittarians are very compassionate and empathetic.

Their philosophical instincts enable them to view humanity in a new way.

They are understanding and kind-hearted.

They are loyal and devoted to those around them and never neglect someone in need.

They never expect favors in return, as their kindness is selfless.

Sagittarians will always be there for you, no matter what.

3. They speak their minds.

Their intellectual nature causes them to be very honest and outspoken.

Sometimes they are honest to the point of bluntness.

They are confident in themselves and say what is on their minds. They don't believe in sugarcoating.

If you want the truth, they will give it to you.

This makes them great romantic lovers, as they are always honest with their feelings and never beat around the bush.

They say what we mean and mean what they say.

There is no bullsh*t when dating a Sagittarius. He or she will always tell you when something is wrong.

4. They are incurable optimists.

Their optimism causes them to always look at the glass half full.

This optimism leads them to believe the grass is always greener on the other side.

Their positive nature attracts all sorts of fortune.

Their optimistic spirit often causes them to go out of their way to help others see the light during times of darkness.

When dating a Sagittarius, you can depend on him or her to always lift your spirits and make you see the good in life.

Their optimism is contagious.

5. They love to travel.

Going back to their need for adventure, traveling is one of the few things that fulfill their never-ending wanderlust.

Their love for freedom allows them to easily adapt to different cultures and ways of life.

They love being thrown into experiences that are new and unfamiliar.

Traveling enables them to see more of the world and broadens their perspective on life.

Sagittarians make the best traveling companions.

6. They are level-headed.

Their philosophical and inquisitive disposition causes them to always think logically.

They have the ability to separate their emotions from certain situations.

While they can sometimes be stubborn, they always have sufficient reasons for believing what they believe.

When dating a Sagittarius, you never have to worry about him or her being irrational or emotionally clouded.

7. They are restless.

This may not always be seen as a strength, but their active fire element often drives them to be restless.

They constantly need to be challenged and intellectually stimulated in their lives, or they become bored.

This is why they like to keep busy. They're always trying and learning new things.

8. They are well-rounded and have an array of interests.

Because of their restless and adventurous personalities, they often have a wide variety of interests.

When dating a Sagittarius, you can expect him or her to teach you about everything from classical jazz to DC Comics.

Sagittarians are artistic and creative, causing them to enjoy and take interest in all aspects of life.

9. They are spontaneous.

The driving characteristics of Sagittarians cause them to be spontaneous. While they are level-headed, they love the thrill of doing something on a whim.

When dating a Sagittarius, surprise him or her with an unplanned trip or activity.

This adds to the adventurous element of life Sags crave.

You never know what to expect when dating a Sagittarius, as he or she will always keep you on your toes, guessing what will happen next.

10. They are open-minded.

Because they are so curious, they are open to everything.

They respect other people's opinions and listen to them entirely with no bias.

They welcome new people and new experiences.

Regardless of their opinions (which they sometimes stubbornly stand by), they are tolerant and accepting of the perspectives of others.

Subscribe to Elite Daily's official newsletter, The Edge, for more stories you don't want to miss.