I’ve racked up a thousand rides on Bachelor’s lifts and skied the peaks big and small. One year, when I could not afford a ski pass, I built an igloo in the woods and then persuaded my girlfriend to spend New Year’s Eve inside it with me so we could start 2007 on one of my favorite backcountry runs. The stamps on our wedding invitations were made from a picture we took that morning.

Photo

Exploring your own backyard on skis, you see, is not so different from love. To do either well, surely someone will think you’re a fool.

I am no fool, though, and over the winters I’ve worked to meet my tribe, compare notes and unearth more secrets. For a few weeks last winter I really dug in and buddied up on lifts and in the backcountry with locals who knew far more than I did. That wasn’t so hard to do.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Paul Mandel, a contractor with the telltale squint of a mountain man, met me on a sunny Saturday at the bottom of Bachelor’s Northwest Express lift. Everyone knows Northwest is where you go for the longest, steepest and best powder runs, especially through the expert-only trees that drop off the West Traverse. The groomers elsewhere are always long and fast.

Photo

“Being up here is the closest thing to being 6 as a 54-year-old like me can get,” Paul said as we drifted over the trees and a run called Osprey Way. “It really keeps you in shape. From the waist down I’m a rock. Above that, well, I like to drink beer.”

Bachelor was one of the first places to put radio chips in ski passes, which can keep a digital record of where, when and how often you ski at the mountain. Paul had already logged more than two million vertical feet that season, the same as one big run from the top of a mountain 379 miles high. By Memorial Day, he’d more than double that to 4,415,776 vertical feet, the second most of anyone at Bachelor all season, and he’d do it all with a well-maintained beer gut. I’d barely crack 200,000 vertical feet and should probably drink less beer.

We scooted toward Sparks Lake Run, a black diamond that falls for 2,353 vertical feet to the lift. From the top of the run you can see northwest over the frozen flats of its namesake, one of my favorite places for canoeing in summer. There was no time to daydream as Paul dropped in.

Photo

The sound of the wind rushing through my helmet grew from a flute to a punk rock scream as I gathered speed. My skis sliced through the uneven snow like a playing card cutting through carpet, but the slope dropped away steeply and took my courage with it. Paul had vanished.

“O.K., so you’re not too far behind me,” he said approvingly when we rendezvoused at the bottom and hopped immediately back on the lift — no line! — for another run with no time to rest. Skiers call this a “hot lap.” The acid cooking my thighs did feel as if it might melt my pants.

We raced down Devil’s Backbone and arced hard down Atkeson’s Zoom, a run named after the photographer Ray Atkeson, who captured the early days of Oregon skiing with a large-format camera. Two of his steely, gorgeous prints hang in my living room. We hit Ed’s Garden, an ambling intermediate run, and skirted around “the cone,” a cratered, volcanic wart on Bachelor’s northern flank that I used to get up at 5 a.m. to hike and ski. Paul could do hot laps all day.

Photo

“Don’t you ever get tired of skiing like this? Just banging out the feet?” I asked him when I caught my breath.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If I said it condescendingly, Paul was too polite to say. Still, I couldn’t help but feel as if I “got” the spirit of skiing and Paul didn’t. Maybe there’s pleasure in churning out the runs with immense physical power, just as there is pleasure in crushing your enemies. But for me skiing needs the slow and the mundane to tuck the thrills into the cozy folds of a memory.

There’s a section of woods just off the Skyliner Express lift, where I sometimes stop for a nip of hot chocolate from my thermos and listen for flakes settling on the boughs, a sound that reminds me of someone sliding into bed. There’s another spot just above Red Chair — a throwback to the days when all of Bachelor’s lifts were color-coded — where you can find a fumarole, a vent where the volcano breathes. Sometimes I’ll go look for a cave rumored to be off the Rainbow Chair. I’ve searched and searched but I’ve never found it.

Photo

Paul had plenty of his own places, too.

“I’m not always doing hot laps,” he replied. “For me, what makes this place great is the community. You get to know so many people when you’re here every day. You ski with them, get to know their spots.”

He slipped his gloves into his pole straps.

“Come,” he said. “Let me show you something.”

We skied down a long, narrow road — a cat track — that contoured north around the mountain toward a statue of Bill Healy, a 10th Mountain Division soldier and master developer who raised $100,000 to transform “Bachelor Butte” into Oregon’s seventh ski area in 1958. From there we connected with an intermediate run called Downunder, where the wind had sculpted the snow into great frozen crests and I slashed their tops with my skis the way a surfer might slash the lip of a wave. Gerry Lopez, the Hawaiian surfing legend who now lives in Bend, once told me these frozen swells factored into his decision to trade the tropics for a home about as close to Bachelor as you can build.

Paul did long, measured swoops and I thought I might catch him until he darted off the run into a section of trees I’d passed by a thousand times. I followed him a short way into another stand, where he stopped. There, a handful of hemlocks with trunks as big as bridge pylons had grown tightly together to form a small woodsy enclave. It was so peaceful and protected in this pixie nest that a fierce wind would be but a whisper. Three other skiers were already there, and our abrupt arrival startled them. One of them quickly shoved his bare hands into his Gore-Tex pockets. Despite the calm it was still cold.

Photo

“Hi!” Paul greeted the group. “Didn’t mean to scare you. Just wanted to show my friend here the Puddy Tree.”

I ski as much as 30 days a season at Bachelor, and I’d never once heard of the Puddy Tree. None of my friends had either. It appears on no maps but is an example of a phenomenon found at ski areas from coast to coast: a special spot, often hidden just feet from the masses, that skiers find, name and then frequent, sometimes sharing its location through word of mouth. Some are runs, like Octopus’s Garden, an unmarked glade at Mad River Glen in Vermont, with tight turns and drops. Others are a rite of passage: the Hole in the Wall in the backcountry off the Upper Panorama Gondola at Mammoth Mountain in California is a lava tube you can ski right through. The Puddy Tree, with its wooden plaque and faded family photo, is a memorial.

“Yeah, we knew Mike,” said one of the skiers, who hurried off as soon as I pulled out a notebook. Michael M. Puddy, I later learned, was a well-liked dentist and high school ski coach in Bend who spent a lot of time at Bachelor. In 2003 he went out for a motorcycle ride and didn’t come back. His friends made the plaque and hung it here, a better choice than inside some cave. The other skiers slipped off, and the quiet grew.

Photo

“There are all these ghosts in here,” Paul whispered in a way that was much less creepy than reverent. “So many stories.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If you go back far enough, many of those stories start with a Norwegian.

Of course, people had been skiing long before history was written, but the tradition in central Oregon — and the country as a whole for that matter — owes much to the Norsemen who in the early 19th century immigrated to the United States with their funny skis, ready to work the immense woodlands of a burgeoning timber trade.“With their ‘long boards’ they were able to demonstrate that a normal lifestyle and work could continue even when snow reached a depth of 15 feet or more,” wrote Peggy Chessman Lucas in her book, “Mount Bachelor,” published in 2005. “Even horses were fitted with skis.”

By 1915 the United States had what would become the oldest, continuously running ski area in the country, Howelsen Hill Ski Area, in Steamboat Springs, Colo., and by 1927 Oregon had its first ski area — the nation’s fourth — at Cooper Spur on the northeast side of Mount Hood. By then two Norwegians, Nels Skjersaa and Emil Nordeen, had come to Bend to load lumber onto flat cars. They’d work side by side all day in the mills, then ski in the hills west of town. The club they helped form, the Skyliners, struck a chord and more than 100 of the day’s 8,000 ur-Bendites signed up in a matter of weeks, enough to make the news in 1927. Skjersaa’s younger brother, Olaf Skjersaa, opened Bend’s original and eponymous ski shop in 1939 in a flimsy mill shack on Florida Street, where he’d install metal edges into the day’s wooden skis. Twenty years later, the Skjersaas, Nordeens and countless Skyliners formed the popular backbone that helped Mr. Healy get “Bachelor Butte” off the ground.

Photo

“When I was a kid we didn’t ski here the way we think of it now,” said Terry Foley, 72, whose mother was one of the earliest Skyliners. “She’d drop us off way out on the edge of town where the club had a warming hut, and we’d climb up and ski down for hours. In a way backcountry skiing was all there was.”

When Bachelor opened on Oct. 18, 1958, with one 3,900-foot-long “pomalift,” two rope tows and a 1,500-square-foot day lodge, Mr. Foley was one of the first people in line.

Bachelor is the kind of mountain you can grow old with, but it’s the central Oregon backcountry that keeps you young. There are hundreds of places to ski — Paulina Peak, Broken Top, a spot we call Little AK — that all lie within an hour’s drive of Bend or less. To ski them, you must be willing to walk.

wash. 20 miles Portland oregon Area of detail Sisters 97 oregon Bend Mount Bachelor 20

With a modicum of fitness, though, the journey up can be as pleasing as the journey down. Special bindings release your heel while gripping your toe to make walking easier. Removable climbing skins stick to the bottoms of skis to help you go up. Imagine going for a jolly winter StairMaster workout, and then cranking up the fun with fresh tracks all the way down.

A few days after I met Paul I drove west out of Bend to a trailhead below a sweeping escarpment called Tam McArthur Rim, which rises like a bulldozer blade near the town of Sisters. Some friends of some friends had invited me to spend three days skiing “Tam” from two cozy yurts perched on the shores of a heart-shape lake. There we’d find bunk beds for 12, crackling wood stoves, a sauna and board games. No igloos required.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

My bros in, say, Jackson, Wyo., may scoff at the rim’s modest measurements — maybe a mile and a half wide, 1,200 vertical feet high, most of it not steeper than about 30 degrees — but the place still makes me giddy with an endless number of runs that drop off the crest into enormous bowls. Nearly all of it is north-facing. The runs get steeper and longer west of an aquiline promontory called the Proboscis. A relatively short hike up a natural earth ramp called the Escalator takes you to the top out of the way of avalanches.

Shane Fox, the shaggy 45-year-old co-owner of Three Sisters Backcountry, rents the yurts and runs guided trips onto the rim. He met our group at the trailhead, where we loaded up a series of custom-built sleds that looked something like troughs fixed to toboggans. In went mounds of fresh vegetables, Deschutes brewed beer, clothes and everything else we’d need for the next few days.

A light snow fell as we straddled the sleds like cowboys and Shane dragged our crazy train for six miles behind a snowmobile to our circular homes. He and his business partner, Jonas Tarlen, spend a week every fall assembling the 20-foot-diameter yurts and then another week every summer tearing them down to minimize impact on both the environment and the yurts.

“I spent 15 years working to get the permits for this so I could make no money,” Shane joked. “But, man, I do love to ski.”

Conditions couldn’t have worked out better. A mini weather station inside the yurt showed temperatures on the rim had remained steady at 29 degrees with light wind for a full eight hours as four inches of snow fell that first night. We fueled up on eggs and bagels, slapped on the skins and headed out, our avalanche beacons blipping silently under our jackets.

Over the next few days we were rowdy teenagers cut loose in a winter wonderland of giant hemlocks, airy ridges and untracked snow. Soon we’d established our own ski lifts — well-worn “skin tracks” up the Escalator and beyond that made going up that much faster. We bounced down runs like Jelly Roll, caught air off rocks and ate hummus and salami in the persistent silence of a primeval forest. Paul had told me once he could spend days among trees like this. I could, too, and I did.

In 10 years I’d never spent so much time in those woods as I did on that trip, and it will probably take me another 10 to suss out its finest spots. When I do, I may just share them. In the meantime, I’ll be riding the Rainbow searching for a cave.