Oh, cinnamon rolls, banana bread. How have I not joined you before?

Let me set right this injustice, join your little hands, if you will, so you can forevermore be united in holy sweet baked good matrimony.

Dramatic? Over the top? I think not (Rhonda).

After having such success with my 7 Ingredient World’s Easiest Vegan Cinnamon Rolls, I knew more experimenting was to be done.

You guys have been loving on my first recipe. It’s been one of our most popular to date! And because I love banana bread so much, this recipe was bound to happen sooner or later.

The banana bread infusion happens in two ways: 1) banana puree in the dough, and 2) banana slices and walnuts in the centers. The result is an amazingly moist, banana-bread like cinnamon roll just begging to be frosted (and that, we must do).

BONUS: This recipe is seriously simple! Just 1 bowl and 9 ingredients (10, including the glaze). Plus, there’s only one true rise and no fancy methods required. Just pure, easy, simple cinnamon roll goodness that takes about 2 hours total.

This means you could wake up around 9, make these little gems, and be enjoying them by brunch. Huzzah!



Oh man, these are not to be missed! They’re:

Tender

Warm

Gooey

Perfectly sweet

Comforting

Slightly crisp on the outside

Infused with banana bread flavor

Cinnamon-filled

Seriously substantial

& Surprisingly simple



Make these rolls for a special weekend breakfast or brunch, or on a Sunday to enjoy throughout the week (that’s a good week). And if you take these rolls to work, I can almost guarantee you’ll be the queen (or king) of the office. That’s right, so many friend requests, so little time.

If you do try this recipe, let us know! Leave a comment or take a picture and tag it #minimalistbaker on Instagram! We absolutely love seeing what you guys cook up. Cheers and happy baking!

5.0 from 25 reviews 1-Bowl Banana Bread Cinnamon Rolls Print Friendly Version Prep time 1 hour 30 mins Cook time 30 mins Total time 2 hours Simple, fluffy vegan cinnamon rolls infused with banana bread flavor and made in just 1 bowl! Author: Minimalist Baker Recipe type: Dessert, Breakfast, Snack Cuisine: Vegan Serves: 8-10 Ingredients 1 packet (2 1/4 tsp) instant/fast-acting yeast

1 cup unsweetened plain almond milk

1/2 cup vegan butter (I use Earth Balance), divided

1/3 cup + 2 Tbsp sugar, divided

1/4 tsp salt

1/2 cup mashed ripe banana + 1/2 cup sliced banana, divided

2 3/4 - 3 1/4 cups flour (I used a ratio of 2/3 unbleached all-purpose, 1/3 whole-wheat pastry)

1/2 - 1 Tbsp ground cinnamon

optional: 1/2 cup raw walnuts or pecans, crushed Instructions In a large mixing bowl, heat the almond milk and 3 Tbsp Earth Balance in the microwave in 30 sec increments (or heat over medium heat in a large sauce pan), until warm and melted (never reaching boiling). Let cool to 110 degrees (43 C) - the temperature of bath water. It should be warm but not too hot or it will kill the yeast. (If you used a saucepan to heat the milk, transfer to a large mixing bowl now.) Sprinkle on yeast and let activate for 10 minutes. Then add 1 Tbsp sugar and salt and stir. Next, add in 1/2 cup mashed ripe banana and stir. Add flour 1/2 cup at a time, stirring as you go. The dough will be sticky. When it is too thick to stir, transfer to a lightly floured surface and knead for a minute or so, adding flour as needed, until it forms a loose but still springy ball. Only use as much flour as it will take. Rinse out your mixing bowl, coat it with canola or olive oil, and add your dough ball back in seam side down. Cover with plastic wrap and set in a warm place to rise for about 1 hour, or until doubled in size (see photo) - mine only took 40 minutes. On a lightly floured surface, roll out the dough into a long rectangle ~1/4 inch thick. Brush with 1/4 cup melted vegan butter and top with 1/3 cup sugar (I used a little brown sugar mixed in with the cane sugar) and 1/2 - 1 Tbsp cinnamon (up to preference). Then add about 20 very thin banana slices so it's easy to roll, and most of the walnuts. Slowly and tightly roll up the dough and situate seam side down. With a serrated knife or a string of floss, cut the dough into 1 1/2 - 2 inch sections and position in a well-buttered 8x8 square or comparable sized round pan (you should have about 10 rolls). Brush with remaining 1 Tbsp melted vegan butter and sprinkle with a bit more sugar (brown or cane) and remaining walnuts. Cover with plastic wrap and set on top of the oven to let rise again while you preheat oven to 350 degrees F (176 C). Once the oven is hot, bake rolls for 28-35 minutes or until slightly golden brown. Let cool for a few minutes, then serve warm. Optional: Frost with dairy-free cream cheese frosting or a simple dairy-free glaze (recipe below). Notes

*Nutrition information reflects 1 of 10 cinnamon rolls without glaze.

*Adapted from my *For a simple dairy-free glaze, melt 1 Tbsp vegan butter and add to ~2 - 2 1/2 cups powdered sugar. Mix and gradually thin with dairy-free milk 1 tsp at a time until pourable but still thick.*Nutrition information reflects 1 of 10 cinnamon rolls without glaze.*Adapted from my World's Easiest Cinnamon Rolls Nutrition Information Serving size: 1 roll (of 10) Calories: 304 Fat: 13g Saturated fat: 3g Carbohydrates: 41g Sugar: 12g Sodium: 174mg Fiber: 2.3g Protein: 5.4g 3.5.3226