Your Horoscope by Susan Miller

This will be a big month! We have two eclipses, September 1 and September 16, plus one gorgeous new moon September 30, the move of Mars to a brand new sign for the first time in months and months, and the move of Jupiter to Libra for the first time in twelve years. Mercury will be retrograde for the first three weeks of the month, and on top of all that, we have the luckiest day of all of 2016. Wow! Let’s get started!

The first day of the month brings a major solar eclipse, September 1, to fall in your tenth house of honors, awards, and achievement. So important is this house that the ancient astrologers called it the house of dignity, where you rise so high in the community, industry, or the world that you gain enormous respect from others for your wise leadership and mounting experience. The start of the month, and for weeks to come, will emphasize your career.

You are about to rise like cream to the top, dear Sagittarius. Your ascent will be well deserved, for you have worked very hard all year with the blind faith that that your hard work would eventually lead to something – now your belief in yourself will pay off. With a planetary line-up in your house of fame this dazzling, even enforced changes would benefit you. I am not saying you will have an enforced change, but if you do, don’t worry one bit

All solar eclipses are new moons, but they are very special ones – they have the strength of three new moons rolled into one. Eclipses are super-powerful and very intense. They often bring change to the status quo, and they root us out of a complaisant state to push us forward. It’s often impossible not to notice the effects of an eclipse, especially if it touches off one of the degrees of your planets in a chart. Accompanying your new moon solar eclipse on September 1 will be the mighty Sun, Jupiter, and Mercury. Remarkably, Mercury, the ruler of your mid-heaven (the highest point in your chart, ruling career) will be perfectly conjunct Jupiter, give of gifts and luck. Wow!

When I was learning astrology, I remember asking my Little Mom (as I called my mother) why nothing much was happening in my life despite beautiful aspects in my chart, including a very strong one from Jupiter. She asked me if I had a new moon in that area of my chart that held Jupiter. She explained that without a new moon, nothing much would happen. I remember saying, in a few months I do. My mother replied that we always need a new moon to package all the prevailing aspects and send to send them to you, like a bouquet.

YOU, dear Sagittarius, have that new moon that you have needed all year to make progress in your professional life. Not only do you have a new moon, but it’s a solar eclipse, known to set off months of energy and excitement in the area of the chart the eclipse will occur, in your case, your lofty house of career honors.

Mars and Saturn are currently traveling close in Sagittarius. This is a stop-go aspect and a pairing of opposites. Mars is an aggressive, daring planet, while Saturn is cautious and conservative. If you have wanted to act with purpose and speed, but have felt unsure of which way to go, or when, that would sound right. You need to see Mars and Saturn separate, which they are in the process of doing now, but won’t be far enough apart to feel the difference until mid-month.

It is better that you hold off on big decisions anyway. Mercury is now retrograde, which started August 30 and will continue until September 22. You started to feel the vast slowdowns and postponements, the inability to reach important people, and so forth, as early as mid-August, as we always feel the impending retrograde of Mercury before its official turn retrograde date. This time, Mercury will be retrograde in your house of career success, so this is the area you will need to show patience. When Mercury “wakes up” it won’t be back to full power until October 15. Like people, it takes planets time to ramp up and get going at full speed.

Sign no contracts, and don’t buy electronics during the retrograde. My TV blew up (literally) in August, so I had to buy a new flat screen TV. This time I bought a smart TV, but I don’t feel I have the PhD necessary to run it. The man who delivered it carefully showed me in detail how to use my new TV. He told me I would need three remotes to control different functions, including one just for sound (that one was easy to remember).

Yet somewhere along the line in the few short weeks I have had it, I became confused. I now have four TV remotes to get from one channel to the next, but I still can’t see all the channels on the menu, only some. I even deleted Netflix by mistake and can’t figure out how to get it back. Actually I finally gave up and went into the bedroom to watch my other flat screen TV while I work (not a smart TV, but it does have Apple TV, which means I have all the extra stations on it). Working in my bedroom is not convenient. I am practically in tears trying to use my new television in my living room. This would actually be hysterical if it were not so tragic! I keep the TV on while I work to keep me company. I miss it when it’s off.

My point is this: even though I bought the TV when Mercury was not retrograde, now that it is, I started to have problems and will pay the man to come back to get it easier for me to see my new TV.

Now, back to my discussion about eclipses! Eclipses come in pairs, two weeks apart, so the second eclipse will arrive as a full moon lunar eclipse, September 16 in Pisces 24 degrees. That eclipse will light your house of home. Neptune will continue to tour the home part of your chart until 2025, so be sure you have a rider on your home owner’s or renter’s insurance to cover floods as well as other problems with water, now and for years into the future. I am not saying you will necessarily have a flood or other water concern this month, but astrology is about assessing probability, and your chances of having water damage problems are rising in probability with this eclipse. As your friend, I want to protect you. If you already have home owner’s or renter’s insurance, I will bet that your policy does not cover water damage – you have to ask for it, as insurance companies typically leave out that coverage. Check with your broker today.

Daily Astrology Zone With our new subscription service you get forecasts for your sign each day of the year from the top astrologer in the world. Subscribe Now »