SB Posted a year ago

Virgo’s always confused me as a child; I wondered how it was possible for a man to have the Zodiac sign of a woman. Now that I know better, it has all become very clear to me. Let me start off by saying that this is my favorite of all Zodiac signs. I have always found Virgos to be wonderful people. They really do, possess all the qualities of a woman. They are loving, caring and giving people. They wouldn’t think twice before sacrificing their happiness for the sake of others.

Apart from that, every Virgo I ever knew was soft-spoken and kind. They would always treat me with respect. They managed to maintain composure in some pretty dark situations. They have a way of seeing beauty in things no one else can. If there is anyone maintaining balance in the world it’s the Virgos. You are a very lucky person if you ever get to date one.

1. Virgo’s tend to improve the lives of those around them. They have a way of seeing through people and things. You will find them managing situations no one else would be able to manage. The good thing is that they aren’t afraid of taking the liberty to correct and amend things. If you ever happen to date a Virgo, you will feel that you have become a better person. It’s just who they are, they bring out the better in you. When you interact with a Virgo you start look at life from a whole new perspective. The scary thing is that you could be a pretty hard ass person but, they will still somehow manage to change your approach towards life.

2. Virgos are self motivated people, they wouldn’t take anything up as a profession unless they absolutely love it. They love what they do and are very passionate about their work. They are proud of what they do and if you try to tell them otherwise they wouldn’t be happy about it. A Virgo will always support your ambition; you should be equally supportive about theirs. If you cannot support your partners’ dreams you have no right to be in a relationship. You know what fuels a Virgo? Their ambitions! - Continue reading on next page