How do we love Val d’Isère? Let us count the ways. Firstly, it has staying power. This morning the resort will open for business for the 2016-17 season and the lifts won’t shut again until May 1 2017, 156 days later. From the first Alpine dusting to the last squelch of spring snow, that is a heck of a lot of skiing time.

One of the reasons Val d’Isère can guarantee these winter pleasures is its altitude: 1,850m at village level, 3,456m at the top of La Grande Motte glacier in the Espace Killy ski area it shares with neighbouring Tignes, with 60 per cent of the pistes set above 2,200m. The north-facing slopes help too, of course, as does the impressive network of 900 snow cannon supplied by the Snow Factory below the Olympique lift, which can reportedly produce enough of the white stuff to cover a football pitch with a metre of snow in less than an hour.

Size plays its part, too. Espace Killy has 300km of runs, 1,900m of vertical, a 10,000-hectare ski area (whatever that means; it certainly sounds big), two glaciers and a pair of snow parks upon which to cavort. There are 94 lifts, plenty of off-piste and every variety of restaurant, accommodation style and après-ski concept you could wish for – this last option illustrated by La Folie Douce banging away relentlessly at the top of the Daille lift.

All of which certainly helps convince us Brits. Val d’Isère has long been our favourite ski resort, with the most recent statistics, from 2014-15, revealing that we bag 43 per cent of the available beds. (The French themselves muster only 38 per cent.)

This morning the resort will open for business for the 2016-17 season and the lifts won’t shut again until May 1 2017, 156 days later Credit: ©andyparant.com

Finally, Val d’Isère has La Face de Bellevarde, better known simply as La Face. This is the black run everyone thinks they should have a shot at, its reputation forged in the 1992 Albertville Winter Olympics, where it delivered one of the most exciting men’s downhill races ever. It pours down for almost 3km into the resort at an angle calculated to inspire awe and excitement… or at least that’s what the rest of my family think.

A photo posted by HEAD Ski (@head_ski) on Dec 17, 2015 at 11:19pm PST

You see, my wife and two sons (aged 13 and 11) are all better, bolder and braver on the pistes than me. Together, we scoped La Face a couple of years ago on a day out from Tignes. During our stay in Val d’Isère towards the end of last season, they were looking forward to it as a challenge to be enjoyed; for me it was a test to be endured.

Val d’Isère is often said to be a resort best suited to intermediates (which I am) and experts (which I am not). The blues are reputed to have a reddish tinge; the reds shade towards black. It certainly felt that way after a first morning when I utterly failed to find my ski-legs above Le Fornet, Val d’Isère’s easternmost ski hub. Two embarrassing wipeouts on the (red) Signal run left me feeling despondent, and even a session of patient coaching from a kindly Scottish instructor called Murray Howie had failed to lift my spirits. Thankfully Murray had a plan: let’s head to Solaise, he said. You’ll be able to sort yourself out there.

Solaise is the big news for this season in Val d’Isère, with a new 10-person gondola – complete with heated seats and Wi-Fi – replacing the old Solaise Express chairlift, bringing capacity up to 3,600 skiers per hour in the process. During our visit, there were plenty of other innovations taking shape at the top, including a new “North American-style Day Lodge” and picnic area. Covered magic carpets called Pimpam and Poum were already in service, ferrying beginners around near the mild gradients served by the Madeleine lift.

Val d’Isère is said to be best suited to intermediates and experts Credit: This content is subject to copyright./Jacob Sjman Svensson / Folio

I tried a few turns in the adjacent ski tranquille zone and suddenly, magically, Val d’Isère was transformed. Instead of being too-tough-to-handle, it was all easy-peasy. Forget La Face, I told myself, and relish the fact that this resort has enough varied terrain to make even lost-your-confidence skiers rediscover their pole-planting skills.

Soon I was back with my family, getting to grips with the rest of the skiing across Val d’Isère’s four sectors: Bellevarde, Solaise, Le Laisinant and Le Fornet. The runs off Cascade below the Glacier du Pissaillas became favourite late-morning treats on the spring snow, before we returned via the rollercoaster-like Leissieres lift. We spent plenty of time, too, above La Daille, dining at the terrific Le Triffolet mountain restaurant (pizzas from €14.80/£12.60) and skiing the tree-lined OK Coupe du Monde and Orange runs. We also exercised our ski passes by reacquainting ourselves with old favourites such as the Double M run in Tignes.

The rivalry between Val d’Isère and Tignes makes for an amusing dynamic: the stereotype is that visitors to the purpose-built villages at Tignes think of themselves as devoted solely to skiing, while Val d’Isère is seen as being swankier, its guests easily distracted by food and fashion. Conversely, I was jokingly told by one local that “Val has class; Tignes is its Seventies housing estate.”

There’s certainly a sense of place in Val d’Isère. Spin around from your assessment of the Italian menu at La Casa Scara on Rue d’Eglise and there’s the 17th-century eglise itself to provide the reassurance of history. Equally, the parking-free centre is compact enough to get around easily, with the chalet-hotels that dot the periphery generally easy on the eye. The smart set won’t feel out of place as they potter down the high street for drinks at Le Blizzard, or go for the full après-ski experience at Dicks Tea Bar. But for every shopper weighed down by bags from Quicksilver and Billabong, there are just as many only-here-for-the-skiing types grabbing a bite at Le Salon des Fous, or – our favourite – Crepe Val’s, with its array of tasty galettes (savoury crêpes, from €11.50).

A photo posted by Dick's Tea Bar - Val d'Isere (@dicksteabar) on Jan 3, 2016 at 9:04am PST

Our accommodation managed to capture the best of both worlds. Last season Ski Total – together with sister brands Inghams and Esprit – took over the running of the 31-room Hotel Le Savoie, formerly an independent five-star property, set on the main street around five minutes walk from the Solaise chairlift. The resulting chalet-hotel concept works a treat, focusing on the likely desires of British skiers: a decent boot room, afternoon teas and plenty of all-inclusive wine with your dinner, plus charming, enthusiastic British staff.

It also adds some dazzle. Our vast room had two lovely mezzanine bedrooms leading off the main living area, with plenty of warm wooden furnishing on show and a selection of games and books adding a homely touch. In the communal areas, scatterings of big glass vases and ceramics added a sophisticated counterpoint to all the comfy sofas, rustic stone and chalet wood-framing. Meanwhile, sumptuous evening meals – dishes such as supreme of chicken filled with basil mousse, or fillet of smoked haddock with a saffron and mussel broth – were taken in the pretty restaurant, its wide conservatory windows surveying a snow-clad terrace.

Hotel Le Savoie

For our family, long since grown out of kids’ club distractions, it was perfect. Those whose children need more of a helping hand might wish to consider the adjoining property, Ducs de Savoie, operated by Esprit, which goes bigger on childcare but drops the decor down a notch or two. One fellow guest travelling with an 11-year-old said of her daughter: “She’s loved Esprit holidays, but she’s older now and wants to see more of us.” Well, from that more adult perspective, Le Savoie delivers.

Occasionally we’d break our routine for drinks at adjacent Fondue Factory, with its exhibition of vintage skis, or leave the dinky spa/swimming pool at Le Savoie for a splash in the Centre Aquasportif, which is more chichi than a municipal sports centre has any right to be. But all the while the pressure was mounting: my face-off with Le Face could no longer be ducked.

One reason La Face has so many people sliding down it towards the end of the day is that it can be tough finding an alternative way back into the village from Rocher de Bellevarde. The obvious route is the blue Santons run, but it was regularly closed due to bad weather during our stay. All too often La Face beckoned, but I’d find myself ducking into the Olympique bubble while my family skied downwards with whoops of happiness.

I had a plan, though. Halfway down the run, at the top of the Bellevarde Express, is the tiny Peau de Vache (“Cowskin”) restaurant. I’d been told that its reputation for offering the finest burgers on the mountain meant that it would be almost impossible to get a table. Nevertheless, I poked my head into the dark interior.

“We are full, totally full,” said a man behind the bar, before I’d even asked.

“But I’ve heard great things…” I weaseled.

“Ah, don’t believe everything you read,” came the reply. But was that the chink of a smile?

A tentative flick through the reservation book? Bingo. A last-minute cancellation at noon on Friday, you say. For four? Perfect.

The interior of Peau de Vache is a dimly lit delight, the cowhide curtains leaving guttering candles as the only illumination. Food-wise, these are the pleasures of the carnivore. After carving your way through a smoked sausage, try the signature burger: beef, St Marcellin cheese, walnuts and honey (€26). The service is fantastic: friendly, funny, welcoming.

Peau de Vache Credit: Office du Tourisme Val d'Isère/Office du Tourisme Val d'Isère

It proved the perfect incentive. With the prospect of a good meal inside me, I conquered the top half of Val d’Isère’s iconic black very slowly – and with increasingly strained thighs – but without a single fall. And by the time I’d arrived at the Stade Olympique second section, I’d had the benefit of a spectacularly large burger to help weigh me down during the final mogul field.

So, how do we love Val d’Isère? If I might borrow from Elizabeth Barrett Browning once again, we love it “to the depth and breadth and height”. We love it because it caters for all skiers, from novice to expert. And we love it because even its toughest ski run offers some blessed relief right in the middle.

Staying there

Ben Ross travelled as a guest of Ski Total (01483 791935; skitotal.com) which offers seven nights at the Chalet Hotel Le Savoie from £3,930 for a family of four, based on two adults and two children (aged two to 10 years). The price includes return flights from Gatwick to Geneva, transfers and chalet catered accommodation with hot and cold buffet breakfast, afternoon tea and five-course evening meals with complimentary wine provided.

Hotel Le Savoie Credit: ierom

Lift pass

Six-day lift passes cost from €278 (adult) and €226.80 (child), including one free entry to the Centre Aquasportif.

Ski Hire

Six days’ ski and boot hire costs from €160 at Snowberry (snowberry-valdisere.com).

Ski lessons

Murray Howie (murrayhowieskiing.com) offers private lessons for €240 for three hours.

Eating there

Crepe Val’s (00334 794 11462); Peau de Vache (00334 790 61129)

More information

valdisere.com