My freshman year, my first class was with an English professor who became as much of a maternal figure to me as an educational mentor. I can’t count the number of hours I spent talking with her about everything from Southern literature to my destructive patterns in romantic relationships, all while she lovingly supplied me with Diet Dr Peppers and made enough jokes at my expense to keep it light. Where my family or finances fell short, she would fill in the gaps.

And she wasn’t the only supportive figure in my academic community: In the English department alone, I had three other professors I could run to at a moment’s notice, cry to without embarrassment and freely ask for advice.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Sign Up for the Opinion Today Newsletter Every weekday, get thought-provoking commentary from Op-Ed columnists, the Times editorial board and contributing writers from around the world. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

There is a sense of camaraderie at Liberty that extends from the dorms all the way to the deans. The three-hour discussions that followed my weekly psychology workshop, the classes I took with my professors-turned-mentors, the two years I traveled along the East Coast with a ministry team, the ample barbecue I devoured with friends at a teaching assistant’s house, and the movies I’d watch with my own students when I became a teaching assistant — those were my formative experiences. And they have nothing to do with Mr. Falwell.

Is it embarrassing to me that he is what people associate with my degrees? Yes. Do I feel an ever-growing obligation to call on him to repent for his unwavering public support of Mr. Trump? Yes.

In fact, I believe the school’s trustees should consider removing him because his comments will inevitably affect the types of student who will be attracted to, or turned off by, the school. His support of the president calls into question his moral judgments and ability to lead. But none of that bleeds into my feeling shame to the point of not associating with Liberty.

Similarly, despite my personal frustrations with President Trump, I am not forfeiting my American citizenship. I’m simply determined to fight harder for the best parts of democracy.

I’m also not leaving the evangelical church because prominent leaders are still supporting a president who is unashamed of his racist commentary or lewd boasts of sexual assault. Instead, I will fight to change that, and in this case, advocate the removal of those leaders from positions of power.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

So for those of us who aren’t yet swallowed up by resentment and still see promise in Liberty — despite Mr. Falwell’s crippling lack of judgment and the school’s systemic issues (like its rocky relationship with students of color or other marginalized groups on campus) — let’s do exactly what is needed to fix broken systems all around us, in government and elsewhere: Let’s make phone calls, stage peaceful protests, bring thought leaders together, analyze the problem as a community, and refuse to allow the status quo or biased media coverage to dictate our expectations for our institutions.

I am better because of my time at Liberty, and I am indebted to my professors and peers who taught me to think critically, live with conviction, and lead without compromise. I share the righteous anger of many of the alumni who want to return their diplomas, but I cannot act in the same way.

I’m marked by the time I spent in Lynchburg, Va., and those years taught me how to fight for what I believe in. So while some are cutting the cord from Liberty, I’d rather figure out how to cut out the infection.