At the Met Office in Exeter the clouds are gathering ominously. It's a typical dodgy-looking summer's day and, glancing up, I have no idea whether to reach for the sun cream or dig out my brolly. But while the clouds have me baffled, they are one of Dame Julia Slingo's specialities. In fact they're one of the reasons why Slingo became a meteorologist in the first place. "Meteorology just seemed to me to be the epitome of physics in action," she tells me once I duck indoors. "You could look out of the window and see a rainbow, or you could see clouds form, and you knew exactly what was going on to create what you were seeing."

In taking up the mantle of chief scientist at the Met Office in 2009, Slingo returned to the very institution in which she began her career nearly 40 years before. Managing the work of around 500 scientists, it's Slingo's responsibility to steer research that ranges from forecasting tomorrow's weather to modelling what the climate will be up to a century from now.

But it's a high-powered position that began with a baptism of fire; just months into the role, Slingo was slung squarely into the limelight. The Met Office's breezy expectation of a barbecue summer had turned sour, with the country dripping in the wake of widespread downpours. The Met Office, the papers concluded, had dropped the crystal ball. Slingo, however, remains defiant. "What people forgot was that it said it was 'odds on for a barbecue summer'," she says. "It is probabilistic and therefore it is not right or wrong." But she admits that, blunder or not, it was a wake-up call. "It actually spurred us on to really do some very serious research about seasonal forecasting, and how do we communicate probabilities and the elevated risk of this type of weather or that type of weather," she tells me. "We've made fantastic progress in the last four or five years and [had] some real breakthroughs I don't know would have happened if we hadn't had that little 'incident'."

Perhaps, given what followed, it is hardly surprising that the faux pas seems just a 'blip'. For that winter, "Climategate" broke. Fuelled by emails hacked from the University of East Anglia, allegations of scientific misconduct were splattered over the front pages. With the potential to undermine public acceptance of global warming, and an international climate change conference about to kick off in Copenhagen, a strong response was urgently needed. Slingo gave it, from organising a huge collection of signatures from scientists in support of the science behind global warming, to coordinating a vast release of data. "It wasn't for me to comment on what was in the emails," she says, "[But] I didn't feel any doubt about the science." Indeed despite her calm, almost reticent demeanour, I am beginning to suspect Slingo is a glass-half-full kind of woman. "I felt you just had to turn it into a positive actually," she says, "and use it to help to communicate the science that we do and be much more open and transparent."

Not that such sanguinity hasn't been sorely tested. Just as the Climategate inquiries neared their conclusion in spring 2010, yet another emergency exploded as the Icelandic volcano Eyjafjallajökull began spewing ash into the air. "They were wanting us to forecast not just where the ash was going, but how much ash there was in the atmosphere," she says. "Nobody really knew what the aircraft engines could tolerate." It was a tense time, with the aviation industry champing at the bit to get its planes back in the air. "It was a very fast-moving period where we had to do some research on the hoof," she says. Yet despite the pressure, Slingo rather enjoyed it. "It is kind of what scientists like really – the challenge."

But then, she's always loved the practical side of science. "I just like understanding how things work that I can see in the real world," she says. It was this that drew Slingo – born Julia Walker to teachers in Warwickshire in 1950 – to study physics and later meteorology. Graduating with a BSc from Bristol, she was expecting to embark on a master's course at Imperial College, London, when she heard that her application to join the Met Office had been successful. Imperial was pragmatic. "They said 'science jobs in the Met Office are like gold dust,'" Slingo says. So she took it.

What followed was an intense course in meteorology, from the theory of atmospheric circulation to making weather forecasts. "In those days all the observations would come on little machines and it would be a string of numbers and you would have to plot them by hand on the weather map," she says. It was, Slingo believes, valuable training – even now, she reveals, she can glean a pretty shrewd idea of the forecast from a shuftie at the maps. "It never leaves you," she says. It was an exciting time to be at the Met Office. With climate modelling still in its infancy, Slingo and her colleagues pushed ahead to develop new, cutting-edge models. One of Slingo's key contributions was to write the computer code for a new "radiation scheme" – code that essentially allowed researchers to investigate how land and oceans as well as clouds, gases and other atmospheric components interact with solar and thermal radiation. "It was a huge piece of code," she says. Slingo went on to tackle a host of issues, from developing a new cloud scheme to using climate models to investigate the formation of weather systems over Africa that lead to hurricanes in the Atlantic. She also produced some of the Met Office's earliest work on the effects of increased CO2 levels on our planet's temperature. "I don't suppose any of us at that time thought it [global warming] would be such a big deal in 40 years," she admits.

After she left the Met Office in the early 80s to have her first daughter, she was soon snapped up by the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. A second daughter and a stint at the National Centre for Atmospheric Research in the US with her husband and fellow meteorologist, Tony Slingo, followed. Returning to the UK in 1990, she took up a position at Reading University and continued to work on tropical weather and climate, as well as investigating the impact of climate change on communities. She also persuaded academics to adopt the Met Office's climate model ("I think that enabled us to really forge ahead scientifically," she says), founded the interdisciplinary Walker Institute for Climate System Research and, over the years, gained a reputation for pushing for more powerful computers. So when Japan unveiled the world's most powerful computer, the "Earth Simulator", in 2002 it was no surprise that Slingo's team was quick to collaborate. That, she says, stole them a march on researchers the world over.

By the time Slingo became chief scientist at the Met Office, she was not only a professor of meteorology and president of the Royal Meteorological Society – the first woman to hold these positions – but also director of climate research at the National Centre for Atmospheric Science.

But what should have been a triumphant return to the Met Office was marred by tragedy. Just after Slingo was appointed the post, a sudden illness claimed the life of her husband. Nevertheless she decided to stick with her decision. "He was desperate that I took it," she says.

Since then, Slingo has pushed ahead on all fronts, from developing academic collaborations to tackling science's gender imbalance and, crucially, advocating that weather forecasting and climate prediction use the same models. "That's absolutely the core of the reason of why we are so successful as an organisation," she tells me.

But it hasn't been easy. In February, following her remarks that the heavier rainfall recorded over the UK might be linked to climate change, Slingo found herself in the firing line of climate-change sceptics, receiving a personal attack from the former Tory chancellor Nigel Lawson. She shrugs it off. "It reflected more on him than on me. He didn't like the message that I was giving," she tells me. Her confident, unflappable attitude is almost steely, but then, as she puts it: "I always stick to what the science says." And with that, it seems, one can weather any storm.