On my last morning in London, I visited the Victoria and Albert Museum, one of the great decorative-art collections in the world. The place is like a giant display cabinet of England’s infinite treasures: Indian saris, Egyptian scepters, Persian carpets, diamond tiaras, golden Buddhas. There is an 18th-century wooden automaton of a tiger mauling a man, as well as a full-size plaster copy of Michelangelo’s David that includes (in a case nearby) the giant fig leaf commissioned to shield its genitalia from prudish Victorians. On the day I went, the museum was crowded: tourists filling the galleries, art students sprawled out sketching on the floor.

Except for the porcelain collection. If you ever want to feel alone in London, go up to the Victoria and Albert’s porcelain collection, all the way at the top of the building. It feels like a secret attic where the queen keeps her special china. There is such an insane proliferation of porcelain — precious, clean, pristine white plates and bowls and figurines, all of them protected by glass — that it becomes almost impossible to see them as individual pieces. Even the transcendently good stuff, the Ming dynasty vases and Meissen coffee pots, are so spare and fragile and cold that the eye just stares right past them as the feet walk on to the next room. Whatever cultural power the stuff once had has gone the way of corncob pipes and smelting and aristocratic Elizabethan neck ruffles.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In 2009, the museum invited de Waal to contribute a major piece to its collection. He grew up visiting the museum, so he knew its porcelain collection well. He knew its loneliness, its isolation. He came up with an ingenious solution. De Waal designed a huge red aluminum ring, 120 feet in diameter, to nest inside the museum’s dome. The red ring is actually an elegant circular shelf: inside of it, all the way around, are pieces of porcelain by de Waal, large and extremely white, inspired by the museum’s collection. There are 425 of them, flashing against the red like teeth in a violent mouth. When visitors enter the museum, on their way to the better-known galleries closer to the street, their eyes are almost inevitably drawn up to this colorful ring hanging, very distantly, over the grand lobby. It’s like the hint of a scandal up in the attic, a sudden reason to make that long trip.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

‘‘The White Road,’’ de Waal’s new book, performs an analogous trick. It rescues porcelain from the cultural attic — makes the subject feel vital, modern, interactive. In the book, de Waal refers to ‘‘Moby-Dick’’ several times (the whiteness of the whale, etc.), and he writes about porcelain as Melville writes about cetaceans: as one of the central elements of the universe. Porcelain is not just porcelain, it’s the essence of displacement. Touch a piece of it, and you travel through time, place, states of being, from ancient Chinese peasants harvesting clay to German alchemists suffocating in castle basements to emperors bankrupting their kingdoms in order to feed their collections. ‘‘Porzellankrankheit,’’ Germans called it — ‘‘porcelain sickness.’’ It is a delicate subject with a feverish history.

De Waal has his own special case of porcelain sickness, of course, and in ‘‘The White Road,’’ he follows it around the world. He visits primordial white hills in China, France, Germany and England. For 500 years, de Waal writes, the West had no idea how porcelain was made: People speculated that it was the crushed-up umbilical cords of fish that had been buried underground for decades. In fact, it is only clay. But it is clay of a very special kind: an extremely smooth combination of two minerals, petunse and kaolin, mined separately and mixed together in exactly the right proportions. When fired at extremely high temperatures, porcelain clay fuses into a kind of glass, hard and white but still slightly translucent. It is this paradoxical combination of qualities — hardness, softness, solidity, translucence — that has made people throughout history go so bananas.

‘‘The White Road’’ is a book of excess. It goes too far. It gets lost. It repeats itself. De Waal takes us all over the world, all over history: Jesuit priests, Spinoza, Constantinople, manhunts, self-immolation, Hitler, Cherokees, Quakers, modern Chinese street vendors selling ‘‘sixteenth-century porcelains from last week.’’ His prose style is like his pot style: He gets drunk on simplicity, on repetition. ‘‘The car turns off the new highway on to the old road and off the old road on to the old track rising between two farmers’ houses.’’ It could have been an easier book, more linear and contained. But then ‘‘Moby-Dick’’ could have been easier, too. One of de Waal’s core beliefs is that messes are interesting. There’s so much to feel inside of them.

Photo

De Waal is an evangelist of touch. As he wrote in ‘‘The Hare With Amber Eyes’’: ‘‘Touch tells you what you need to know: it tells you about yourself.’’ As he writes in ‘‘The White Road’’: ‘‘Thinking is through the hands as well as the head.’’ Hands are the great universal human fact. Our opposable thumbs are the tools that helped launch us out of the forests and into the world we know now. Some of the earliest art is simply handprints on cave walls — a high-five across 30,000 years. Even in our postmodern, postindustrial, increasingly virtual digital world, we depend on our fingertips to decode for us, instantly, the crucial outlines of our environment: whether an object is hot or cold, whether it’s something to drink or peel or squeeze, something your teeth will be able to penetrate, a volume button or a power switch. We are still affectionate animals who greet each other with hands: handshakes, fist bumps, high-fives, hugs.

De Waal’s hands are rapturously attentive to the weight, grain, proportions and personalities of objects. For years, he says, he could remember every single pot he ever touched. In the same way that Bobby Fischer could run into someone at a tournament and say, about a game they had played 15 years earlier, ‘‘You should have moved your bishop to e7,’’ de Waal can recall exactly the way a particular vase swelled or tapered toward its rim, or if the heft of a teakettle was particularly well-balanced. Recently, he says, his memory has filled up, and old pots have started to drop out of it.

De Waal worries that modern humans are beginning to lose our fluency in touch. He thinks that we live in a world impoverished by a lack of attention to tactility. Our culture has a deeply embedded shame of the body, shame of skin, shame of ‘‘mere’’ sensation — a desire to transcend the animal coarseness of nerves, hair, blood flow. To live in clean, noble abstractions: things that we think will last. All of our digital technology, all of these portable virtual worlds, only make it easier to live in touchlessness. If you put on virtual-reality goggles, there will be plenty to look at and pretend to touch, but nothing to actually feel. But touch, de Waal insists, is fundamental to the human experience. If we can’t fully inhabit and value the world of touchable objects, de Waal told me, then we can’t fully value other human beings.

Despite our culture’s squeamishness, there is no escape from touch, and there is no escape from time, and these two facts are intimately related. All of the hands that exist today, all of the objects they will ever touch, will someday, not long from now, be gone. All we can do, in the meantime, is to be fully present in the world we have — to roll it, insistently, in our fingers — and, in doing so, to light up as many of the nodes along the continuum of time that we can: the absent uncles and workmen and lovers and thieves, the people who held the world before any of us were here to hold it, and, if we’re lucky, the people who will hold it when we are finally gone. Although de Waal often writes about objects, what he is really writing about is the power of presence, of intimacy. As he puts it at the end of ‘‘The White Road’’: ‘‘It is this consolation, someone walking part of the way by your side, that means almost everything. Everything.’’

On my second afternoon at the studio, the 58 pots de Waal made the day before had dried to their optimal texture — potters call it ‘‘leather hard,’’ or ‘‘cheese hard.’’ And so de Waal started cutting them. He slapped them back on the wheel and, as they spun, trimmed off excess clay with a set of tools that reminded me of dental equipment. He bent himself in half again, and his head bobbed slightly in rhythm with the spinning wheel, and ribbons of wet clay spun off the pots. Occasionally he would pick up a little sponge and dab, mysteriously, at the rim. When all the excess clay had been trimmed, de Waal pulled the pot off the wheel and, with a knife, cut his characteristic little scallops out of the base. This is one of his signatures, these dents and caves. De Waal cut quickly, intuitively, like someone paring an apple. He was not precious about it, not terribly serious, just matter-of-factly doing what his hands told him was the right thing for each pot. He could have been whittling sticks by a lake.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

I kept asking questions about how he decided what and where to cut. Why that spot and not this one? Why deep and not shallow? He said he was just trying to bring the outside of the pot into the proper relationship to its inside. O.K., yes, sure, I said. But why did you make that particular cut? And why did you make that one?

After a while, de Waal responded by handing me one of the pots — fresh, cheese-dry, ready to cut. He handed me the knife. ‘‘Cut it,’’ he said. This seemed sacrilegious, but he insisted. So I did. I tried to emulate his cutting: to whittle out small slivers that added texture without ruining everything. The first pot I tried turned out O.K. De Waal said that my largest cut had a nice ‘‘authority’’ to it.

The second pot, however, I completely destroyed. I carved out so many hunks of wet porcelain that there was almost nothing left — a little nub, all angles. Ruination. De Waal seemed to agree. But he also seemed equally satisfied with both pots, the success and the failure. He set them both on the board to dry.