Were a seat in Formula One decided on personality, Jamie Chadwick would stand every chance of becoming the first woman to race in the sport since Lella Lombardi did so at the Austrian Grand Prix in 1976. Making it demands much more than warmth and wit, however, and fortunately the 19-year-old is backing her attempt to end the drought with talent and unwavering determination.

Chadwick sees herself simply as a racer but, much as she would like to, ignoring her gender is impossible in a male-dominated sport. In 2016, the sport’s then impresario, Bernie Ecclestone, dismissed women as being physically incapable of driving an F1 car and said they would not be taken seriously behind the wheel.

Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel’s epic battle makes Monza unmissable | Giles Richards Read more

Chadwick is rightly dismissive of such entrenched beliefs. “It’s not based on any fact,” she says with resolution. “If I can prove him wrong that’s just added motivation.”

Having already achieved remarkable success during her short career, and racing for the first time this season in single-seaters in the British F3 championship, neither motivation nor being female has proved a hindrance. “Women can compete equally in motor racing,” she says. “That’s one of the great things about it. It is physically and mentally tough but women can compete on the same level as men.”

She has expected none, nor received, any favourable treatment. “Everywhere I have gone everyone has respected that I am there to do a job,” she says. “If I don’t do it I get the same bollocking a male driver would get and if I do I get the same praise.”

F1 is her goal but make it or not Chadwick has already earned respect. In 2015, she became the first woman – and the youngest driver – to win the British GT championship. Raised in Bath to a family who had no motor sport background, she took to racing entirely by chance. Her brother Oliver, also now a driver, had begun karting and a simple case of sibling rivalry prompted her to try it. She was 13 at the time, old by modern standards.

It proved to be a momentous decision, having found a sport with which she had a natural affinity. Two years later came another step when, in 2013, Chadwick attended the Ginetta Junior scholarship weekend, turning down a trial for the England Under-18 hockey squad to do so. The Ginetta Junior scholarship provides one driver with their first step on the motor sport ladder, and Chadwick describes the experience as the hopefuls were whittled down as like The Hunger Games. But by the Sunday she was victorious – the last woman standing. Two seasons in the Ginetta Junior series followed, the second in 2014 yielding five podiums and eighth place overall. Good enough to be noticed, she was taken on as one of Aston Martin’s racing academy squad the following year and offered a drive in an Aston GT4 Vantage with the Beechdean team in the British GT championship that season.

The sportscar series is highly competitive but Chadwick says she felt no pressure and alongside her co-driver, Ross Gunn, took two wins and six podiums to secure the title. Along the way they won the Britcar 24 Hours at Silverstone, Chadwick becoming the youngest winner of a 24-hour race in the process. “Everything I feel through the seat comes out of my mouth to the engineers,” she says. “Definitely, I have a natural affinity, I can feel what the car is doing, how much to push it.”

Her assessment is backed by the Aston Martin works driver and three-time Le Mans class-winner Darren Turner. “She has got a natural, smooth driving style and a good understanding of what makes a car work and how to make it go fast,” he says.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Jamie Chadwick races for Double R Racing in the British F3 Championship. Photograph: Jakob Ebrey

Chadwick is assured but not arrogant and her ability to communicate well, learn and apply the knowledge is every bit as important as her feel for the car. She had yet to try the challenge of single-seaters, an altogether different proposition to sportscars and a test in a British F3 car ensued. “I wasn’t looking at F1 initially,” she says. “Then when I tested the F3 car I wasn’t that quick. It was a challenge and I didn’t want to be defeated. The more I drove it the more I loved it and that opened the F1 door.”

She took the drive in this season’s British F3 championship, with Double R Racing, co-founded by Kimi Raikkonen. Her advancement on the first step of the ladder to F1 surprised few who knew her. Chadwick’s mentor is Tom Gaymor, a former driver. “She is one of the best females I have seen at this level,” he says. “I was team-mates with [Indycar’s] Danica Patrick. The only woman that made it in my era. The only one that went on and competed at a senior level and held her own. Jamie is every bit as good and as fast as she was.”

The Beechdean’s owner, Andrew Howard, agrees. “She displayed hunger and the ability to understand how to turn that hunger into something deliverable,” he says of her success in GT racing. “You get a lot of people that have hunger and think they are the next Michael Schumacher but she is bright with it. She understands she has to work hard, she listens and she takes the knocks and learns. And she is an out and out racer.”

F1’s Kevin Magnussen: ‘I’m not here to make friends. It’s a race and that’s it’ Read more

The challenge in F3 is considerably harder. The cars have more downforce, more grip and are far more physically demanding to drive. A task she acknowledges has been hard but one she must master to finally reach the relative comfort of power-steering that F1 affords – another reason Ecclestone’s misogyny was so hopelessly misguided.

Chadwick has been adapting to the new demands this season but her sterling performance in a race‑long duel for fifth in Spa suggests she is learning fast. She has a best finish of third and is a respectable ninth in the championship. There is disappointment, she admits, but that has proved a motivating force and next season wins and the title are the target.

Double R racing’s principal, Anthony Hieatt, who worked with Jenson Button and Raikkonen, sees some similarities that he believes will stand Chadwick in good stead. “The thing about Jenson and Kimi is that they communicate well,” he says. “Jamie is really easy to get on with, the engineers and mechanics can talk to her and she takes an interest.

“She has a warmth about her, which some drivers don’t have. She is honest and most young racing drivers aren’t. If she makes a mistake she is the first person to put her hand up.”

Chadwick acknowledges F1 is her dream, but that honesty is also reflected in a commitment to deserving her place on the grid. “If I don’t do well next year then I will put my hand up and say maybe I am not good enough to make it,” she says. “You don’t want a female to be there as a token effort. You have to have made it on merit. The worst thing that could happen would be if you put someone in who could not complete. It would make a mockery of those who are trying to achieve good things.”