Pro tip: Labor Day was not meant for actual laboring. Please take a day off, Archer. You'll be glad you did when on Tuesday, September 5 go-getter Mars blasts into Virgo and your tenth house of ambition until October 22. With professional demands heating up, you won't have much downtime for the coming seven weeks. This confidence-boosting Mars cycle makes you a fierce competitor now and more than capable of tackling an epic goal this fall. Just don't forget the teamwork part, okay? Otherwise, you could slip back into that "I'll just do it myself!" mode and burn out. Ambitious Mars only visits this part of your chart every other year, a time to aim as high as possible with your aspirations. Skip the small ponds, because the next seven weeks could bring major rewards for your hard work. You may land a prestigious account, score a glamorous client, or be recognized in a widespread and public way for your talents. The ceiling can't hold you now—no, not even the glass one! The tenth house is the boys' club of the zodiac, and you'll smash right into those spaces that are supposedly "guys only." (Cigars and golf, optional.) Working with a bigger corporation or entity might be your path to prosperity in early fall. Does the Sagittarius Empire need a rebranding? Polish up your presentation, so that you hit the right blend of sophisticated, cool and quirky originality that is a hallmark of your indie-oriented sign. You might even enlist a coach, trainer, stylist or designer (or a whole team) to support you in this important mission. One caveat: Mars is the warrior planet and can also add stress. You'll have to keep that fiery temper of yours in check, Archer, so you don't set any important bridges ablaze by getting all "open mouth, insert Choo."

Also on Tuesday, messenger Mercury resumes forward motion after three frustrating weeks of signal-scrambling retrograde. A good deal of the backspin, which began on August 12, took place in Virgo and your goal zone. But on August 31, Mercury slipped back into Leo and your expansive, global ninth house. You may be suffering from information overload, making it impossible to tap into your own wisdom. With Mercury's course correction on Tuesday, you'll get clearer by the minute about what's right for you. Are you ready for a change of scenery? It's now safe to book tickets for a fall getaway or plan a launch for your latest online venture. For best results, you might wait until the shadow of Mercury retrograde completely passes on September 19th to go live. The ninth house rules candid speech, and while the communication planet was off-course, you might have inadvertently offended someone by being a little TOO truthful. Retrograde Mercury may have brought out the preacher in some Archers, but your soapbox sermons probably weren't received in the helpful spirit you intended. No need to banish anyone from your pulpit. Live and let live, Sagittarius—you'll all be happier that way.

Wednesday's full moon in Pisces and your domestic fourth house throws open the blinds, shining a bright light on your personal aesthetics. If the best description for your decorating style is "shabby chic," it's time to upgrade Chateau Sag and turn it into a soft and nurturing hybrid of old AND new. But nothing wrong with upcycling, as long as you're not forcing trash to serve as treasure it can never quite be. If you're entertaining visions of crystal chandeliers, bespoke flooring and leather club chairs, make a budget and a Pinterest board. When you set your mind to something, you're a powerful manifester, and you have two weeks to fulfill these lunar-inspired nesting instincts. Maybe you'll just make your space more functional, setting up savvy storage systems or turning an unused corner into a home office. Throw out, donate and recycle till you're left with only the things you want to preserve. Then organize, inventing smart systems and making sure your lighting is task-appropriate. Hire professional painters if your brushstroke techniques are amateur. If you're in the market to move or buy, start perusing the real estate sections or talk to a broker. Get family members and important female friends in on the search. That dream country house or sweet urban pied-a-terre could be within reach! Your relationship with an important woman might hit a milestone moment—or a make-it-or-break-it speed bump. Maybe the two of you will team up for a profitable venture. But it's equally important to have clear boundaries if you're going to join forces. Expectations and assumptions will take down the ship but clarity will keep you both flying high.



SEE ANOTHER SIGN’S WEEKLY HOROSCOPE