This family in Australia completely shifted the way they source their food – with remarkable success. When wife Nici suffered an illness, the Coopers decided to start growing their own produce at home in Newcastle, and now their one-acre Limestone Permaculture Farm supplies dozens of families with fresh food. They also offer permaculture education and internships, sharing what they’ve learned with the greater community.

The Coopers have been farming at Limestone Permaculture Farm for close to a decade. They grow organic produce, and raise sheep, goats, and chickens. They also keep bees and build with recycled materials, and The farm is powered by energy from wood, water, and the sun – pretty much every greenie’s dream come true. TreeHugger said co-owner Brett suggested they can feed 50 families from the one-acre farm.

Related: Man leaves rat race to grow dream permaculture farm – and it’s flourishing after 3 years

Swales, a chicken tractor, and self-seeding edible ground cover are among the permaculture techniques the Coopers employ at Limestone Permaculture Farm. Brett discovered permaculture over a decade ago. He told the Newcastle Herald, “I was a builder and had done architectural drafting. When I found permaculture, it was less about one form and more about following nature’s design. It blew my mind.”

The Coopers offer farm tours, workshops, internships, and a permaculture design certificate at their New South Wales farm. They still have jobs and only work the farm part-time, but are hoping to transition to permaculture farming full-time. “We feel there has been an awakening across our beautiful country, self-reliance is on the rise again; urban and rural homesteading has people taking their food and energy supply back into their own hands,” the Coopers say on their website. “With each passing day we are transitioning to a more wholesome life, creating a more fulfilling and positive future, not just for ourselves but also for our family, friends, and community.”

+ Limestone Permaculture Farm

Via Happen Films and TreeHugger

Images via Limestone Permaculture Farm Facebook