In his memoirs, Nigel Lawson, a chancellor of the Exchequer under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, wrote that health practitioners regarded themselves as “a priesthood,” making the sector “extraordinarily difficult to reform.”

The National Health Service, he wrote, “is the closest thing the English have to a religion.”

It is also a significant presence in national life, employing 1.6 million people which, it says, puts it in the top five of the world’s largest work forces, alongside the United States Defense Department, McDonald’s, Walmart and the Chinese People’s Liberation Army.

Weekend shifts are at the heart of the current dispute. A proposed new contract would increase basic pay but would reduce the number of hours for which junior doctors receive added compensation for work, particularly on Saturdays.

The government argues that this would improve treatment by creating a genuine seven-day service, and the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, on Tuesday highlighted the elevated mortality rates recorded for some medical conditions on weekends, when hospitals have fewer staff.

Speaking to the BBC, Mr. Hunt compared the situation of a hospital doctor to that of an airline pilot’s being told, “‘I’m sorry, but as it’s Sunday you don’t have a co-pilot, but off you go to New York.’”

The doctors counter that their stand against excessive working, and the strain it puts on them, makes them the guardians of safety in hospitals.

Officially, junior doctors are required to work a 48-hour week, but that is calculated over a 26-week period, and they can end up working long stretches, particularly over weekends.

The Strike at a Glance

The government insists that doctors would not be worse off under the new contract, but that is disputed by the British Medical Association, which represents more than 37,000 of the country’s 55,000 junior doctors and which describes the proposed conditions as “unsafe and unfair.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The dispute has crystallized a broader set of worries and frustrations felt by many doctors working in a system in which demand for health care sometimes seems infinite, but for which resources are definitely not. When junior doctors were asked to authorize a strike last year, 98 percent voted in favor.

Some opinion surveys have suggested that public support lies with the medical professionals, at least in the initial phase of the walkout. The doctors are planning two more protests in the coming weeks: a 48-hour strike that would also affect nonurgent care, and another day’s walkout in which they would withdraw all treatment.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Several opposition politicians sided with the strikers on Tuesday. Justin Madders, who speaks for the Labour Party on health issues, said that junior doctors had been left with “no choice but to take this action,” while the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, visited a London hospital picket line.

The dispute highlights a crucial distinction between the government-administered British health care system and the market-driven American approach to health care.

The National Health Service has been praised for providing universal access while being cost-effective, while the American system, despite the introduction of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, is still so expensive that many people cannot afford treatment.

Although British doctors can operate private practices, most participate in the National Health Service, making them subject to the government workplace rules that the junior doctors are now protesting.

In the United States, doctors are more likely to work in for-profit practices, with health insurers’ payment menus setting the rules.

Whatever the comparison, the British system is well regarded internationally by some measures, despite its stretched resources. A 2013 survey of 11 industrialized nations by the Commonwealth Fund, a nonpartisan health policy research group in the United States, ranked Britain No. 1 over all and at the top in categories including quality of care, patient access and efficiency.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The United States was ranked at the bottom over all, despite having the costliest care per capita ($8,508), compared with Britain’s lowest cost by this measure ($3,405).

The National Health Service fared less well compared with other European countries, however. A 2014 survey by the Health Consumer Powerhouse, which is based in Sweden, ranked England’s health service 14th out of 36.

Like other aspects of the dispute, the scale of the strike in England was contested on Tuesday. The British Medical Association said that “tens of thousands of junior doctors” were striking, but N.H.S. England, which leads the health service, said that 39 percent of junior doctors, out of a possible 26,000, had reported for duty on the day shift. The current action is scheduled to end Wednesday morning.

Johann Malawana, who leads the medical association’s junior doctors’ committee, said that his members felt that they had no alternative but to strike, and appealed to ministers to address “concerns around safe working patterns and ensure the contract recognizes the long, intense and unsocial hours which junior doctors do.”

Anne Rainsberry, the national incident director for N.H.S. England, apologized to all patients affected. “It’s a tough day,” she said, “but the N.H.S. is pulling out all the stops, with senior doctors and nurses often stepping in to provide cover.”