21181 SHARES Facebook Twitter Pinterest Stumbleupon Google Linkedin Tumblr Reddit Digg Vk Delicious Buffer Weibo Pocket Xing Meneame Odnoklassniki Managewp Mailru Line Yummly Frype Whatsapp Skype Mail Print

Some people might roll their eyes at the idea of ‘astrological compatibility’, even those who read their horoscope just for fun during their morning coffee.

But, if you want to find off-the-charts chemistry with a lover, it certainly can’t hurt your chances to look to the astrological charts. This handy little sexual astrology primer will help you discover your best bedroom partner, according to your zodiac sign.

Aries

March 21 to April 19

Your sexual style: Represented by the ram, and also the first sign in the zodiac, Aries is assertive and aggressive. They savor the act of sexual conquest. Aries tend to be the pursuers in relationships, rather than being the pursued. They aren’t fond of expressing their emotions and prefer pure, stimulating, physical contact. Aries also love it when people run their fingers through their hair or rub their scalp.

Sexually compatible with: Leo, Libra, Gemini, Scorpio.

Taurus

April 20 to May 20

Your sexual style: Not as sexual as they are sensual, the Taurus prefers stimulation over arousal. They consider the scents, sounds, and touch of a sexual experience to be extremely important. They don’t pursue after the perfect sexual partner because it’s a waste of time. Rather, they sit and wait for sexual bliss to find them.

Sexually compatible with: Scorpio, Cancer, Virgo, Capricorn.

Gemini

May 21 to June 21

Your sexual style: When it comes to sexuality, Geminis are very open. They love to experiment and find having sex in unlikely places to be thrilling. Also, Geminis prefer dirty talk to silence in the sack. They’re great at flirting and enjoy having a witty, sexual rapport with their partners. Basically, they like to have fun with sex.

Sexually compatible with: Aries, Gemini, Sagittarius, Aquarius.

Cancer

June 22 to July 22

Your sexual style: The Cancer is a creative and sensual lover. But, before they can settle into sex, they must be wooed. Cancers have a keen sense of intuition, which helps them easily please their partners. For hem, sex is both loving and lustful. Also, they have a love of food which often leads to a penchant for oral stimulation.

Sexually compatible with: Taurus, Leo, Capricorn, Pisces.

Leo

July 23 to August 22

Your sexual style: Known for their consistent and powerful sex drive, the Leo relies on charm and charisma to attract mates. They are a pleasure to be around, as well as being a fan of pleasure. As a lover, they are passionate and attentive to your needs. Leo’s love to fool around with some foreplay and seduction, and consider their back to be one of the most sensitive parts on their body.

Sexually compatible with: Scorpio, Aries, Sagittarius, Leo.

Virgo

Aug. 23 to Sept. 22

Your sexual style: Virgos, unlike their name are not innocent flowers who know nothing of sexual nature. In fact, their energy levels are usually very high and they can be both highly sexual and sensual. Virgos absolutely love the sensation of touch, and find a gentle caress to be a major turn on. They aren’t ones to ask for much in the way of sexual needs, but they do like a careful, well-designed, and honest lovemaking experience.

Sexually compatible with: Taurus, Libra, Pisces, Capricorn.

Libra

Sept. 23 to Oct. 22

Your sexual style: The Libra is often considered to be the most refined sign of the zodiac. They are known to have excellent taste and a delicate sensibility. What makes the Libra go crazy about another person is mental stimulation. They are true sapiosexuals. A good partner for a Libra will draw out their passion by flirting. Also, the Libra loves suggestive elements like sexy lingerie, music, and chocolate.

Sexually compatible with: Aries, Gemini, Leo, Sagittarius.

Scorpio

Oct. 23 to Nov. 21

Your sexual style: If you know anything about Scorpios, then you know they have a reputation for being passionate, lustful, and highly sexual creatures. They become aroused by power and control, as well as role playing. Combining a strong libido with strong emotions, the Scorpio often struggles with their own desires.

Your sexiest matches: Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Pisces.

Sagittarius

Nov. 22 to Dec. 21

Your sexual style: The Sagittarius is known as a wanderer and a seeker. Sags are charming, affectionate, and attentive in the bedroom, and out. They often find that having spontaneous sex partners are their best bet because they easily become frustrated with routines, resulting in boredom. When a Sag is single, they’re incredibly flirty and perhaps promiscuous. Even when coupled up, they’re likely to be adventurous and open to try out new things.

Sexually compatible with: Leo, Aries, Gemini, Aquarius.

Capricorn

Dec. 22 to Jan. 19

Your sexual style: Similar to the Scorpio, the sign of Capricorn has a reputation for being one of the most sexual, as well as sensual. It doesn’t take much to wake up a Capricorn’s libido. They consider their legs and knees are their most sensitive erogenous zones. While not into public displays of affection, they do love being courted and seduced. Also, Capricorns pride themselves on their sexual stamina.

Sexually compatible with: Cancer, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo.

Aquarius

Jan. 20 to Feb. 18

Your sexual style: The sign of Aquarius is generally regarded to be intellectual and idealistic. Aquarians are suggestible and unconventional in the bedroom. They enjoy being seduced but hate to relinquish all control. Although they don’t come off as overtly sexual, below the surface they are enthusiastic and imaginative lovers. Also, Aquarius require strong mental stimulation from their partners.

Sexually compatible with: Gemini, Aquarius, Sagittarius, Virgo.

Pisces

Feb. 19 to March 20

Your sexual style: The sign of Pisces is a communicative and easygoing one. They have no trouble attracting admirers, and never have to be aggressive – it’s simply not in their nature. In bed, the Pisces is romantic, sensual, and playful. Their soulful side really appreciates having an imaginative partner. They are happier when they are pleasing others, rather than when they are being pleased… as long as the fire of their imagination is kindled.

Sexually compatible with: Scorpio, Cancer, Virgo, Libra.

By Raven Fon || Featured Image

Discover Valuable Knowledge Hidden In The Stars

For some people, it is a forbidden art associated with sin and sorcery, banned by various organized religions.

For others, it may be nothing more than wishful thinking, or an age old hoax that just won’t go away. To the intuitive seeker, however, it is a valuable system filled with startling revelations about the self and others. It can explain people’s many different personalities, be a great guide to healthy relationships and even aid us in finding success and meaning in our earthly lives. I am of course talking about the great language of the stars: Astrology.

This ancient, cosmic science views mankind as not only being affected by genes and environment, but also by the condition of our solar system at the time of our birth. During the course of this book, we will go through the basics of astrology, before taking a close look at each of the 12 Zodiac signs, their unique traits and meanings, their ideal partners, and how this information can help you better understand the true spiritual essence of yourself and others.

Uncover The Incredible Secrets Of The Zodiac!