The diagrams also include five kivas, circular spaces that in bigger settlements were used for religious purposes. At the Haynie site, they apparently were used for everyday activities like sleeping, cooking or making tools.

Despite their practical nature, each of the Haynie kivas also contains a “sipapu,” a Hopi term for a ritual hole with a ladder used to symbolize a connection between the world and the spiritual realm, Dr. Ryan said.

“On a ladder, you are symbolically moving in and out of worlds that are vertical,” she said. “You are constantly being reminded of where you have come from, your identity and origin stories. It’s just a beautiful thing.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

On a tour of the site, Dr. Ryan pointed out a line of mortar in which alternating layers of clay and calcium carbonate made a stronger fill and insulated the surrounding rooms.

“Those are basket loads of fill that someone has dropped in there, probably in the early 1100s,” Dr. Ryan said of spaces between the stones. “That’s so exciting, because now you can see how big a basket was and how much dirt was in there.”

Estimates of the age of the Haynie structures comes from tree-ring dating. One of the roof timbers dates has been dated to 1111, when the center of the Chaco civilization was moving northward into what is now southwestern Colorado.

Archaeologists link the Haynie site to Chaco Canyon by noting shared architectural features, like subfloor ventilation systems, tall ceilings and flat-sawed timbers.

More Reporting on Archaeology

Like many ruins in the Four Corners region, the Haynie site remains on private land now owned by Haynie Ranch LLC, a company dedicated to preserving the site and investigating its history.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Surrounded by farmland, the site is closed to the public unless visitors receive permission from the Crow Canyon Archaeological Center. (By contrast, ancient cliff dwellings at nearby Mesa Verde National Park draw thousands of visitors.)

But the Crow Canyon team has been denied access to some of the ruins sitting on another parcel of private land, marked off by a barbed-wire fence that runs through the site.

Portions of the Haynie site, such as floors and hearths, will be covered over with earth, or “backfilled,” after the current project is completed, to protect the ruins from further exposure to the elements.

“Once it’s been open for that long, all of this wood has collapsed, all of the plaster has popped off the wall, and joints of all the architecture are coming loose because the mortar has run,” Dr. Ryan said. “Leaving things open is not where you want to be at for preservation.”

“It sounds crazy to the public, but backfilling is the most important way to preserve archaeological sites,” she said. “To have this backfilled would be the best protection you could have for a site.”

Covering the ruins would also help protect them from the “pothunters” who have removed artifacts from “pretty much every site” in the Southwest, said Dr. Kantner.

Even if the ruins were on public land, it would not be feasible to stabilize them in a way that makes them accessible to the public, he added. But the information gleaned from them can be shared through websites and museums.

“It’s still possible to tell their stories from what’s left,” he said.