“The initial report about his injury was a little Pollyannaish,” Mr. Shimkus said. “It’s going to be a tough rest of the year for us.”

His roommates said the home they share, about a mile and a half from the Capitol in southwest Washington, had offered a bit of solace during a week marked by violence. Their living arrangement, complete with scuffed-up furniture, children’s toys and baseball photos on the wall, continues the Washington tradition of lawmakers who have decided to split the bill on an affordable, collegelike crash pad where they can spend a few days a week with like-minded colleagues. (Mr. Shimkus bought the home 15 years ago, and they split the mortgage costs, an amount they would not disclose, four ways.)

Their shared politics help: Policy discussions tend to creep up amid viewings of the western movie “Tombstone” or of endless sports coverage on ESPN, Mr. Shimkus said. But a love of baseball is what has drawn these colleagues together.

Mr. Scalise, 51, who is popular in his heavily Republican district and has been a Trump supporter, has been known as the night owl of the group, still able to wake up for practice and be out the door within minutes.

Photo

“You’ve got three boring guys and one guy who’s kind of lively,” Mr. Shimkus said. “It’s been really quiet.”

In the days since the shooting, they said, life has been a blur of hospital visits, phone calls and, of course, the bright lights of a ballgame, this city’s last best attempt at bipartisan showmanship. The game included a prayer at second base in honor of Mr. Scalise, and staff members wore T-shirts emblazoned with a photo of the four congressmen, taken at a game years ago.

“With my roomies @RepShimkus @RepKevinBrady supporting @SteveScalise at congressional baseball game & pray for his recovery,” Mr. Paulsen tweeted on Thursday, posting a photo of him and his housemates wearing mismatched jerseys and yellow Louisiana State University hats, a tribute to Mr. Scalise’s alma mater.

“It was bittersweet,” Mr. Brady said. “It was a great night to come together, and Steve would’ve loved every minute of it.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The across-the-aisle camaraderie displayed at the game is not likely to continue at the Capitol. Several partisan debates over issues including a tax overhaul, the budget and health care still loom large. Mr. Brady, the chairman of the powerful House Ways and Means Committee, said he spent his nights reading and reviewing policy from a battered green chair in the home the men share.

“The vitriol and the debate has gone so far to the extreme,” Mr. Shimkus said. “Compromise, which is the essence of public policy and passing laws, has been disparaged by extremes on both sides.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

None of the three congressmen said their roommate’s injury would change their stance on gun restrictions.

“I am even more adamant that we not politicize these tragedies,” said Mr. Brady, whose father was shot and killed in 1967, “and focus on the recovery of the victims.”

There has been discussion among the roommates about how to welcome Mr. Scalise home. Mr. Paulsen, who lives in the basement, said that he hoped Mr. Scalise would return eventually, and that the group had discussed rearranging bedrooms to make it easier on their friend, whose recovery is uncertain and is expected to be lengthy in any case.

“We’ll make any adjustments in the house that make it easy for him,” Mr. Paulsen said. “So if he needs to have accessibility downstairs, I’ll move my room in a heartbeat.”