This week Lisa Schwarzbaum reviews a new book about Nora Ephron and her romantic comedies. Ephron was a regular contributor to the Book Review, and in this essay from 1986, she ruminates on the unexpected advantages of revision. Below is an excerpt.

Now I am in my 40s and I write screenplays. Screenplays — if they are made into movies — are essentially collaborations, and movies are not a writer’s medium, we all know this, and I don’t want to dwell on the craft of screenwriting except insofar as it relates to revision. Because the moment you stop work on a script seems to be determined not by whether you think the draft is good but simply by whether shooting is about to begin: if it is, you get to call your script a final draft; and if it’s not, you can always write another revision. This might seem to be a hateful way to live, but the odd thing is that it’s somehow comforting; as long as you’re revising, the project isn’t dead. And by the same token, neither are you. It was, as it happens, while thinking about all this one recent sleepless night that I figured out how to write this particular essay. I say “recent” in order to give a sense of immediacy and energy to the preceding sentence, but the truth is that I am finishing this article four months after the sleepless night in question, and the letter asking me to write it, from George Miller of the University of Delaware, arrived almost two years ago, so for all I know Mr. Miller has managed to assemble his textbook on revision without me. Oh, well. That’s how it goes when you start thinking about revision. That’s the danger of it, in fact. You can spend so much time thinking about how to switch things around that the main event has passed you by. But it doesn’t matter. Because by the time you reach middle age, you want more than anything for things not to come to an end; and as long as you’re still revising, they don’t. I’m sorry to end so morbidly — dancing as I am around the subject of death — but there are advantages to it. For one thing, I have managed to move fairly effortlessly and logically from the beginning of this piece through the middle and to the end. And for another, I am able to close with an exhortation, something I rarely manage, which is this: Revise now, before it’s too late.