The journalistic ritual of gaffe-spotting dates approximately to the Vietnam era, but it blossomed into a full-blown obsession during the 1980 candidacy of Ronald Reagan, whose malapropisms were well noted even before he won the Republican nomination. Before the summer was out, reporters were fulminating over his description of the Vietnam War as a “noble cause” and his suggestion that the United States should pursue official relations with Taiwan — a move that contradicted the terms of normalization previously negotiated between the United States and China. Both statements were within the spectrum of conservative opinion, but reporters took them as blunders. By early September, press reports routinely described Reagan’s campaign, in The Times’s words, as on “the political defensive after a string of admittedly costly verbal gaffes.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Two months later, Reagan trounced Carter, winning 44 states. During his administration, verbal pratfalls became enough of a running joke that David Gergen, then his director of communications, commissioned a large plaster foot with a bullet hole in it to be passed around. The Washington Post’s Lou Cannon diligently cataloged the “Reaganism of the Week”; Dinesh D’Souza, who worked in the White House during Reagan’s second term, wrote later that “Reagan had no objection and frequently turned to the column to discover his own gaffes. Reagan’s advisers soon discovered what the boss already knew: that Americans didn’t mind his gaffes and were even entertained by them.”

What Reagan understood, in D’Souza’s telling, was that a gaffe revealed at least as much about the journalists who called attention to it as it did about the politician who uttered it. It reflected their own preoccupations and biases, which voters did not necessarily share. Ever since the late 1960s, when reporters began to take a more active role in scrutinizing presidential candidates, they had operated on the assumption that the way a candidate managed the challenges and humiliations of the campaign trail was in some way reflective of how they would perform in the White House itself — that a candidacy was a meaningful simulation of a presidency. By the 1980s, this vision of campaign reporting was toppling into solipsism. Journalists were, effectively, grading politicians on their ability to perform what everyone understood to be a largely artificial version of themselves — practicing a kind of theater criticism as much as political reporting.

This reached its magnificent zenith in 2012, when a Washington Post reporter shouted at Mitt Romney during a photo op in Warsaw, “What about your gaffes?” What about his gaffes? The George Washington University political scientist John Sides reviewed public-opinion data from the 2012 race and found that none of the hyperventilated-upon slips of the campaign — not even the surreptitiously filmed video of Romney’s “47 percent” comments — had any appreciable effect on either candidate’s support. In imagined service of the interests of voters, reporters had lost track of what actually mattered to them.

Still, criticism of the media’s gaffe fixation — like Michael Kinsley’s famous observation that “a ‘gaffe’ is the opposite of a ‘lie’: it’s when a politician inadvertently tells the truth” — has often been a bit too clever, reflecting the same blend of cynicism and forced naïveté as the trail reporters it maligns. The critics tend to miss something important: the way in which gaffe-hunting is, ultimately, a logical and sometimes deliberate way of tackling the impossible task the press has assigned itself.

For avowedly nonpartisan and nonideological reporters, examining the substance of a politician’s beliefs and policy views is a professional minefield: The more deeply they venture into it, the more open they are to accusations of bias. The benefits of this dilemma mostly accrue to politicians. If reporters spent too much time on the comfortably nonpartisan foibles of Reagan’s “Reaganisms,” they spent too little looking closely at his advisers’ devotion to supply-side economics.

The gaffe, then, is a safety mechanism. It moves a statement from the realm of substance to the realm of performance and strategy — allowing the reporters to critique it without incriminating themselves professionally. To say that Trump’s views on immigration are inhumane, or self-defeating from the standpoint of the economy or national security, might hint at a subjective opinion on the part of the reporter. An easier problem to identify is that, spoken aloud, those views may hurt him with electorally important constituencies, or reflect poorly on his ability to stay “on message” in the manner expected of politicians. A rational candidate would not deliberately do something that unnecessarily jeopardizes his chances of victory, so it follows that the outburst must have been a mistake — a gaffe.

This of course bears little resemblance to how actual voters, pro- or anti-Trump, assess his words. In that sense, Trump really does have more in common with voters than he does with political elites. His inability to apologize or back down has opened the door to a post-gaffe politics, stripping away the convenient fiction of missteps and errors that journalists turn to when they are uncomfortable confronting a statement on its merits.

“This isn’t a situation where you have an episodic gaffe,” Obama said on Aug. 2, needling the many Republicans who had recently denounced Trump’s words without rescinding their endorsements. “This is daily, and weekly, where they are distancing themselves from statements he’s making.” He’s right; at this point, to treat Trump’s statements as anything other than intentional is to uphold political-reporting convention at the expense of common sense. Trump has laid bare journalism’s contradictions — reporters’ desire to be critical of politicians without criticizing anything they stand for — to the point where we have no choice but to examine them. This may be the least expected outcome of 2016: The most flagrantly dishonest candidate in recent memory is forcing us to have the most honest political discussion we’ve had in years.