From Open Source Ecology

EN

AR

BG

BN

CS

DE

EL

EO

ES

FR

HE

HI

HU

HR

IT

JA

LT

NL

NO

PA

PL

PT

RO

RU

SV

TH

TR

UK

VI

ZH-HANS

Article Title: Global Village Construction Set

Definition [ edit ]

The Global Village Construction Set (GVCS) is a modular, DIY, low-cost, high-performance platform that enables fabrication of the 50 different Industrial Machines that it takes to build a small, sustainable civilization with modern comforts. The name, GVCS, has been coined for the first time in 2008 - at a lecture at the University of Missouri, Columbia - see UM Presentation.

Media [ edit ]

Key Features [ edit ]

See summary at OSE Specifications for Product Design. Open Source - we freely publish our 3d designs, schematics, instructional videos, budgets, and product manuals on our open source wiki and we harness open collaboration with technical contributors. Low-Cost - The cost of making or buying our machines is, on average, 8x cheaper than buying from an Industrial Manufacturer, including an average labor cost of hour for a GVCS fabricator. Modular - Motors, parts, assemblies, and power units can interchange, where units can be grouped together to diversify the functionality that is achievable from a small set of units. User-Serviceable - Design-for-disassembly allows the user to take apart, maintain, and fix tools readily without the need to rely on expensive repairmen. DIY - (do-it-yourself) The user gains control of designing, producing, and modifying the GVCS tool set. Closed Loop Manufacturing - Metal is an essential component of advanced civilization, and our platform allows for recycling metal into virgin feedstock for producing further GVCS technologies - thereby allowing for cradle-to-cradle manufacturing cycles High Performance - Performance standards must match or exceed those of industrial counterparts for the GVCS to be viable. Flexible Fabrication - It has been demonstrated that the flexible use of generalized machinery in appropriate-scale production is a viable alternative to centralized production. Distributive Economics - We encourage the replication of enterprises that derive from the GVCS platform as a route to truly free enterprise - along the ideals of Jeffersonian democracy. Industrial Efficiency - In order to provide a viable choice for a resilient lifestyle, the GVCS platform matches or exceeds productivity standards of industrial counterparts.

GVCS Machines [ edit ]

See main article GVCS Machine

OSE is developing 50 machines of the Global Village Construction Set via module-based design. This means that we break machines down into modules, and each module can be developed in parallel with other modules. Examples are CEB Press or Tractor.

The exact list of GVCS machines has evolved over time and is still subject to change. For example, while the MicroHouse and the Car are not GVCS machines in a strict sense (but products created by GVCS machines), they are treated as GVCS machines for historical and business-oriented reasons.

Documentation is found at different places for different target groups:

Graphical list of 50 machines on our main website (Public)

Hierarchical representation of machines/modules at dozuki: http://opensourceecology.dozuki.com/ (Public, Prototypers, Developers)

Wiki internal list of GVCS machines and their breakdown into modules - GVCS Machines and Modules and GVCS State of Completion (Prototypers, Developers)



