Continued from page 1

Using a calendar to get things done is far superior to using a to-do list. Items on a to-do list can sit there forever, constantly getting bumped by things that seem urgent in the moment. And having this list of things that still need to get done is a root cause of underlying stress.

When you master the practice of time blocking—using your calendar instead of your to-do-list—you can literally see your life’s priorities by looking at your weekly calendar.

How does this apply if you’re a/an…

Entrepreneur: Would it be helpful to block time each week to talk directly to customers, review metrics against goals, or coach your direct reports?

Executive: Would it be helpful to block time for your top objectives?

Freelancer: Would it be helpful to set up time blocks each week to read industry blogs or learn how to use new tools?

Student: Would it help to time block study group time and your teachers’ office hours?

Stay-at-Home Parent: Would it be helpful to time block trips to the gym, weekly errands, and bill paying?

Surprisingly, the simple act of scheduling tasks on your calendar—instead of writing them on a to-do list—will free your mind, reduce stress, and increase cognitive performance. Florida State University Researchers showed that the Zeigarnik effect—the stressful conscious and unconscious thoughts caused by unfinished tasks—could be overcome simply by making a plan to accomplish a task—you didn’t actually have to complete the task itself.

“Nothing” Time

As you begin scheduling more appointments, you’ll see your calendar begin to fill up. Before you know it, you might start to feel a bit overwhelmed.

And that’s why you also need to schedule time for “nothing.”

The CEO of LinkedIn, Jeff Weiner, wrote a blog post describing how he time blocks “do nothing” time on his calendar. He wrote:

“If you were to see my calendar, you'd probably notice a host of time slots greyed out but with no indication of what's going on. There is no problem with my Outlook or printer. The grey sections reflect ‘buffers,’ or time periods I've purposely kept clear of meetings.

In aggregate, I schedule between 90 minutes and two hours of these buffers every day (broken down into 30- to 90-minute blocks). It's a system I developed over the last several years in response to a schedule that was becoming so jammed with back-to-back meetings that I had little time left to process what was going on around me or just think.

At first, these buffers felt like indulgences. I could have been using the time to catch up on meetings I had pushed out or said "no" to. But over time I realized not only were these breaks important, they were absolutely necessary in order for me to do my job.”

If It’s Important, Schedule It

You need time to think and spend time with your family, just like you need time for meetings and projects. But it’s easy to assume that certain things will just get done—when in reality, they often don’t.

Use your calendar wisely, and you’ll make sure that the way you use time reflects what’s truly important to you. That which gets scheduled, actually gets done.

Kevin Kruse is the author of 15 Secrets Successful People Know About Time Management .