Money management isn’t easy, but we do our best to break it down for you. Here are some of our best personal finance guides, primers, and explainers of 2016.

Spend less than you earn, save your money, and—poof!—your financial problems are solved. If only it were this easy. Being broke sucks enough on its own, and then there are obstacles that make it extra hard for poor people to fight their way to financial security. For example, here are a few expenses that actually cost more for low-income individuals.



A bit of planning can save you a ton of money when it comes to buying throughout the year. Here’s your comprehensive, always up-to-date guide on the best times to buy everything this year.

After saving up for a long time, I recently bought a home, which caught some of my friends off guard. “I thought you were anti-homeownership,” they said, because I think renting is underrated. Even as a homeowner, I still think renting is underrated. That doesn’t mean buying is a bad decision. The rent vs. buy debate is just silly overall. It ignores the enormous grey area that exists between the two options.



Quite often, the “facts” that people tout when it comes to personal finance aren’t quite facts at all. Sometimes they’re just opinions stated with authority, or they’re based on incorrect information or assumptions. Is it any wonder there’s so much confusion when many finance principles are counter-intuitive?



Retirement is pretty far away for some of us. And it’s better to set smaller milestones for your savings now than to focus on the big, lump sum amount you’ll need to retire. However, it’s also interesting to look at the numbers, and this early retirement grid shows you how long it will take.



Quality clothes last longer for the money you spend, they’re more comfortable, and they make you look and feel pretty good while you wear them. Best of all, you can find quality anywhere. It comes down to buying less mediocre stuff and using that money on a few nice things that last forever.



It’s probably safe to assume no one’s ever gotten rich clipping coupons. That doesn’t mean saving money is a waste of time, though. Some money-saving habits are worthwhile and save you a heap of cash in the long run. Others just aren’t worth it. Here are some specific habits I’ve ditched because they aren’t worth my time and energy (or yours).



They say a sucker is born every minute, but shady businesses are good at convincing you you’re a genius, not a sucker, for giving them your money. Many of these outfits prey on people want to improve their finances, which adds insult to injury. You know to stay away from bogus IRS collectors and Nigerian princes, but there are some less obvious, perfectly legal scams people fall for all the time.

With peer-to-peer payment services like Square Cash, Venmo, and PayPal there’s no need to carry cash anymore. These mobile apps make splitting checks, paying friends back, and lending money to family members as easy as tapping your finger. Let’s look at them, and decide which one rises above the others.

I’m terrible at saving money, I hate studying personal finance, and I tend to have a “carpe diem” mentality when it comes to buying the things I want. Fortunately, a few automated savings apps gave me a stronger hold on my money by doing most of the hard stuff for me.



My Uncle Danny once helped me buy a new Corolla while I watched in awe. He was a relentless, negotiating beast. He threatened. He acted offended. He sat in silence and stared at the salesman. In the end, I paid nearly $5,000 less than I expected. Negotiating is powerful. As a timid person, it’s not something that comes easy for me, and it might not come easy for you. Here are some of the best ways to do it, even when you dread it.



From the day I got my first job as a cart pusher at Walmart, I spent years living from one paycheck to the next. I hovered around the poverty line, hoping that I would last until next month’s rent. At the time it felt normal. It wasn’t until after I started making more money that I realized the psychological scars that living the poor life left on me.

